---
title: Book Summaries
author: Andrew MacFie
rights:  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
language: en-US
...

# Preface

Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0

Generated by <https://github.com/amacfie/book_summary_book>


# Richard Adams

## Watership Down (1972)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watership_Down>

### Part 1 {#part_1}

In the Sandleford warren, Fiver, a young runt rabbit who is a seer,
receives a frightening vision of his warren\'s imminent destruction.
When he and his brother Hazel fail to convince their chief rabbit of the
need to evacuate, they set out on their own, accompanied by nine other
rabbits who choose to go with them. The first challenge in the small
band\'s search for a new home comes immediately, as they are forced to
elude the Owsla, the warren\'s military caste, who believe they are
trying to spread dissent against the chief.Once out in the world, the
travelling group of rabbits finds itself following the leadership of
Hazel, who, until now, has been just another unimportant member of the
warren. The group travels far and through dangerous territory. Bigwig
and Silver, both former Owsla and the strongest rabbits among them, do
well to keep the others protected, along with Hazel\'s keen observations
and good judgment. Along the way, they evade a badger (known in Lapine
as lendris), a dog, a car, and a crow; Hazel also manages to stop three
rabbits from returning to the Sandleford warren.They meet a rabbit named
Cowslip, who invites them to join his warren. At first, Hazel\'s group
are largely relieved to finally be able to sleep and feed well -- except
for Fiver, who senses only death there. Bigwig, Blackberry and Fiver\'s
friend Pipkin suspect something suspicious, but they don\'t think too
much of it. When Bigwig is nearly killed in a snare, Fiver, in a crazed
lecture, makes the group realise the new warren is managed by a farmer
who protects and feeds the rabbits, but also harvests a number of them
for their meat and skins. The residents of the new warren are simply
using Hazel and the others to increase their own odds of survival. Fiver
and the rest of the group work together to rescue Bigwig from the snare,
then continue on their journey, taking with them a rabbit from
Cowslip\'s warren called Strawberry, who asks to join them after it is
implied that his doe is killed in a snare.

### Part 2 {#part_2}

Fiver\'s visions have promised them a safe place in which to settle, and
the group eventually finds Watership Down, which matches Fiver\'s
description of the perfect home exactly. There they are soon reunited
with Holly and Bluebell, who were with Bigwig in the Owsla. The two are
nursing severe injuries which, they reveal, were inflicted as they
escaped the violent human destruction of Sandleford, and then later at
Cowslip\'s warren. Holly also confesses it was he who had tried to stop
them leaving that first night rather than working under the chief
rabbit\'s orders, but Fiver\'s vision coming true has left him a changed
rabbit and he is there to join them in whatever way they will have him.

Although Watership Down is a peaceful habitat, Hazel realises there are
no does, making the future of the warren certain to end with the
inevitable deaths of the rabbits present. With the help of their useful
new friend, a black-headed gull named Kehaar, they locate a nearby
warren called Efrafa, which is overcrowded and has many does. Hazel
sends a small embassy, led by Holly, to Efrafa to present their request
for does.Meanwhile, Hazel and Pipkin, the smallest member of the group,
scout the nearby Nuthanger Farm, where they find two pairs of hutch
rabbits. Despite their uncertainty about living wild, the hutch rabbits
are willing to come to Watership. Hazel leads a raid on the farm the
next day, during which he rescues both does but only one of the bucks,
and at the expense of badly injuring Hazel\'s hind-leg. When the
emissary returns soon after, Hazel and his rabbits learn that Efrafa is
a police state led by the despotic General Woundwort. Holly and the
other rabbits dispatched there have managed to return with little more
than their lives intact.

### Parts 3 and 4 {#parts_3_and_4}

However, Holly\'s group has managed to identify an Efrafan doe named
Hyzenthlay who wishes to leave the warren, and can recruit other does to
join in the escape. Hazel and Bigwig devise a plan to rescue
Hyzenthlay\'s group and bring them to Watership Down; Bigwig is sent to
do the mission, with infrequent help from Kehaar, and the group escape
using a raft. Again, Bigwig nearly dies in the escape attempt. Once they
are at Watership Down, the Efrafan escapees start their new life of
freedom.Shortly thereafter, however, the Owsla of Efrafa, led by
Woundwort himself, arrives to attack and colonise the warren at
Watership Down. Through Bigwig\'s bravery and loyalty, and Hazel\'s
ingenuity, the Watership Down rabbits seal the fate of the Efrafan
general by unleashing the Nuthanger Farm watchdog. As the Efrafans flee
in terror, Woundwort, despite being greatly wounded in his battle with
Bigwig, refuses to back down and leaps at the dog. His body is never
found, and at least one of his former followers continues to believe in
his survival. Hazel is nearly killed by one of the farmhouse cats, but
he is saved by the farm girl Lucy, the former owner of the escaped hutch
rabbits.

### Epilogue

The story\'s epilogue tells the reader of how Hazel, dozing in his
burrow \"one chilly, blustery morning in March\" some years later, is
visited by El-ahrairah, the spiritual overseer of all rabbits, and hero
of all traditional rabbit stories. El-ahrairah invites Hazel to join his
own Owsla, reassuring him of his warren\'s success and its future.
Leaving his friends and no-longer-needed body behind, Hazel departs
Watership Down with the spirit guide.


# Saul Bellow

## The Adventures of Augie March (1953)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Adventures_of_Augie_March>

The story describes Augie March\'s growth from childhood to a fairly
stable maturity. Augie, with his brother Simon and the mentally abnormal
George have no father and are brought up by their mother who is losing
her eyesight, and a tyrannical grandmother-like boarder in very humble
circumstances in the rough parts of Chicago. Augie drifts from one
situation to another in a free-wheeling manner---jobs, women, homes,
education and lifestyle. Augie March\'s path seems to be partly
self-made and partly comes around through chance. In lifestyle he ranges
from near adoption by a wealthy couple who spoil him, to a struggle for
existence stealing books and helping out friends in desperate straits.
His most unusual adventure is his flight to Mexico with the wild and
irrepressible Thea who tries to catch lizards with an eagle. Thea
attempts to convince Augie to join her in this seemingly impossible
task. His jobs include general assistance to the slightly corrupt
Einhorn, helping in a dog training parlor, working for his brother at a
coal-tip, and working for the Congress of Industrial Organizations until
finally he joins the merchant navy in the war. Augie attracts and gets
involved with a string of different women. Firstly a casual acquaintance
as a youth, he gets engaged to a wealthy cousin of his brother\'s wife.
However, through a scandal not of his fault, he is discarded. After a
casual affair with Sophie, a Greek hotel maid, he is swept off by Thea,
whom he had met when living with the rich Renlings and who forecast
their relationship even though he loved her sister. After the fiasco in
Mexico, where he suffered a terrible accident on a horse, he and Thea
began drifting apart; he spending his time playing cards and she hunting
for snakes and lizards in the mountains. Their inevitable split came the
night he agreed to drive another woman, Stella, to another town to
escape her troubled boyfriend. After the break-up, Augie returned to
Chicago and picked back up with Sophie until joining the merchant navy
and heading to New York. There he met up with Stella again and married
her. All through the book, Augie is encouraged into education, but never
quite seems to make it; he reads a great deal for himself and develops a
philosophy of life. Something or somebody always tends to crop up,
turning his path before Augie seriously considers returning to
education. During the war, his ship is sunk and he suffers a difficult
episode in a lifeboat with a man who turns out to be a lunatic. After
rescue, he returns to Stella and the book ends with them living a
slightly dubious existence in France, he involved in some fairly shady
business deals and she attempting to pursue a career in acting.


## Henderson the Rain King (1959)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henderson_the_Rain_King>

Eugene Henderson is a troubled middle-aged man. Despite his riches, high
social status, and physical prowess, he feels restless and unfulfilled,
and harbors a spiritual void that manifests itself as an inner voice
crying out I want, I want, I want. Hoping to discover what the voice
wants, Henderson goes to Africa. Upon reaching Africa, Henderson splits
with his original group and hires a native guide, Romilayu. Romilayu
leads Henderson to the village of the Arnewi, where Henderson befriends
the leaders of the village. He learns that the cistern from which the
Arnewi get their drinking water is plagued by frogs, thus rendering the
water \"unclean\" according to local taboos. Henderson attempts to save
the Arnewi by ridding them of the frogs, but his enthusiastic scheme
ends in disaster, destroying the frogs but also the village\'s cistern.
Henderson and Romilayu travel on to the village of the Wariri. Here,
Henderson impulsively performs a feat of strength by moving the giant
wooden statue of the goddess Mummah and unwittingly becomes the Wariri
Rain King, Sungo. He quickly develops a friendship with the native-born
but western-educated Chief, King Dahfu, with whom he engages in a series
of far-reaching philosophical discussions. The elders send Dahfu to find
a lion, which is supposedly the reincarnation of the late king, Dahfu\'s
father. The lion hunt fails and the lion mortally wounds the king.
Henderson learns shortly before Dahfu\'s death that the Rain King is the
next person in the line of succession for the throne. Having no interest
in being king and desiring only to return home, Henderson flees the
Wariri village. Although it is unclear whether Henderson has truly found
spiritual contentment, the novel ends on an optimistic and uplifting
note.


# Lord Byron

## Don Juan (1824)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don_Juan_(poem)>

### The Argument {#the_argument}

The story, told in seventeen cantos, begins with the birth of Don Juan.
As a young man he is precocious sexually, and has an affair with a
friend of his mother. The husband finds out, and Don Juan is sent away
to Cádiz. On the way, he is shipwrecked, survives and meets the daughter
of a pirate, whose men sell Don Juan as a slave. A young woman, who is a
member of a sultan\'s harem, sees that this slave is purchased. She
disguises him as a girl and sneaks him into her chambers. Don Juan
escapes, joins the Russian army and rescues a Muslim girl named Leila.
Don Juan meets Catherine the Great, who asks him to join her court. Don
Juan becomes sick, is sent to England, where he finds someone to watch
over Leila. Next, a few adventures involving the aristocracy of Britain
ensue. The poem ends with Canto XVII.

### Canto I {#canto_i}

Don Juan lives in Seville with his father José and his mother Donna
Inez. Donna Julia, 23 years old and married to Don Alfonso, begins to
desire Don Juan when he is 16 years old. Despite her attempt to resist,
Julia begins an affair with Juan. Julia falls in love with Juan. Don
Alfonso, suspecting that his wife may be having an affair, bursts into
their bedroom followed by a \"posse concomitant\" but they do not find
anything suspicious upon first searching the room, for Juan was hiding
in the bed. However, when Alfonso returns on his own, he comes across
Juan\'s shoes and a fight ensues. Juan escapes, however. In order to
avoid the rumors and bad reputation her son has brought upon himself,
Inez sends him away to travel, in the hopes that he develops better
morals, while Julia is sent to a nunnery.

### Canto II {#canto_ii}

Canto II describes how Juan goes on a voyage from Cádiz with servants
and his tutor Pedrillo. Juan is still in love with Julia, and after a
period of seasickness, a storm sinks the ship. The crew climb into a
long boat, but soon run out of food. The crew decide to draw lots in
order to choose who will be eaten. Juan\'s tutor Pedrillo is chosen
after Juan\'s dog has also been eaten. However, those that eat Pedrillo
go mad and die. Juan is the sole survivor of the journey; he eventually
makes it onto land at Cyclades in the Aegean. Haidée and her maid Zoe
discover Juan and care for him in a cave by the beach. Haidée and Juan
fall in love despite the fact that neither can understand each other\'s
language. Haidée\'s father Lambro is a \"fisherman\" and pirate who
makes money from capturing slaves.

### Canto III {#canto_iii}

Canto III is essentially a long digression from the main story in which
Byron, in the style of an epic catalogue, describes Haidée and Don
Juan\'s celebrations. The islanders believe Haidée\'s father, Lambro,
has died, but he returns and witnesses these revels. Towards the end of
the canto, Byron insults his contemporaries William Wordsworth, Robert
Southey and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. In this latter section is \"The
Isles of Greece\", a section numbered differently from the rest of the
canto with a different verse, which explores Byron\'s views on Greece\'s
status as a \"slave\" to the Ottoman Empire.

### Canto IV {#canto_iv}

Haidée and Juan wake to discover that Haidée\'s father, Lambro, has
returned. Lambro confronts Juan and attacks him with the aid of his
pirate friends. Haidée despairs at losing her lover and eventually dies
of a broken heart with her unborn child still in her womb. Juan is sent
away on a ship and ends up at a slave market in Constantinople.

### Canto V {#canto_v}

Juan is in the slave market. He converses with an Englishman, telling of
his lost love, whereas the more experienced John says he had to run away
from his third wife. A black eunuch from the seraglio, Baba, buys Juan
and John, and takes the infidels to the palace. He takes them to an
inner chamber, where he insists that Don Juan dress as a woman and
threatens him with castration if he resists. Finally, Juan is brought
into an imperial hall to meet the sultana, Gulbeyaz, a 26-year-old
beauty who is the sultan\'s fourth, last and favourite wife. Full of
stubborn pride, he refuses to kiss her foot and finally compromises by
kissing her hand. She had spotted Juan at the market and had asked Baba
to secretly purchase him for her, despite the risk of discovery by the
sultan. She wants Juan to \"love\" her, and throws herself on his
breast. But he still has thoughts of Haidée and spurns her advances,
saying \"The prisoned eagle will not pair, nor I/Serve a sultana\'s
sensual phantasy.\" She is taken aback, enraged, and thinks of having
him beheaded, but breaks out in tears instead. Before they can progress
further in their relationship, Baba rushes in to announce that the
Sultan is coming: \"The sun himself has sent me like a ray/To hint that
he is coming up this way.\" The sultan arrives, preceded by a parade of
damsels, eunuchs, etc.. Looking around, he takes note of the attractive
Christian woman (Juan), expressing regret that a mere Christian should
be so pretty (Juan is a giaour, or non-Muslim). Byron comments on the
necessity to secure the chastity of the women in these unhappy climes
--- that \"wedlock and a padlock mean the same.\"

### Canto VI {#canto_vi}

The sultan retires with Gulbeyaz. Juan, still dressed as a woman, is
taken to the overcrowded seraglio. He is asked to share a couch with the
young and lovely 17-year-old Dudù. When asked what his name is, Don Juan
calls himself Juanna. She is a \"kind of sleepy Venus \... very fit to
murder sleep\... Her talents were of the more silent class\...
pensive\...\" She gives Juanna a chaste kiss and undresses. The chamber
of odalisques is asleep at 3 AM. Dudù suddenly screams, and awakens
agitated, while Juanna still lies asleep and snoring. The women ask the
cause of her scream, and she relates a suggestive dream of being in a
wood like Dante, of dislodging a reluctant golden apple clinging
tenaciously to its bough (which at last willingly falls), of almost
biting into the forbidden fruit when a bee flies out from it and stings
her to the heart. The matron of the seraglio decides to place Juanna
with another odalisque, but Dudù begs to keep her in her own bed, hiding
her face in Juanna\'s breast. The poet is at a loss to explain why she
screamed. In the morning, the sultana asks Baba to tell her how Don Juan
passed the night. He tells of \"her\" stay in the seraglio, but
carefully omits details about Dudù and her dream. But the sultana is
suspicious nevertheless, becomes enraged, and instructs Baba to have
Dudù and Juan killed in the usual manner (drowning). Baba pleads with
her that killing Juan will not cure what ails her. The sultana summons
Dudù and Juan. Just before the canto ends, the narrator explains that
the \"Muse will take a little touch at warfare.\"

### Canto VII {#canto_vii}

Juan and John Johnson have escaped with two women from the seraglio, and
arrive during the siege of Ismail (historically 1790), a Turkish fort at
the mouth of the Danube on the Black Sea. Field Marshal Suvaroff, an
officer in the Russian army, is preparing for an all-out final assault
against the besieged fortress. The battle rages. He has been told to
\"take Ismail at whatever price\" by Prince Potemkin, the
commander-in-chief of the Russian army. The Christian empress Catherine
II is the Russian head-of-state. John Johnson appears to Suvaroff (with
whom he has previously served in battle at Widdin) and introduces his
friend Juan---both are ready to join the fight against the \"pagan\"
Turks. Suvaroff is unhappy with the women the two men brought, but they
state that they are the wives of other men, and that the women aided
their escape. Suvaroff consents to the women staying.

### Canto VIII {#canto_viii}

Juan and John join fearlessly and bravely in the savage assault on
Ismail. They scale the walls of the town and charge into battle. The
conquest of Ismail causes the slaughter of 40,000 Turks, among them
women (a few of whom are raped) and children. Juan nobly rescues a
ten-year-old Muslim girl from two murderous Cossacks intent on killing
her, and immediately resolves to adopt her as his own child. A noble
Tartar khan valiantly fights to the death beside his five sons, just as
instructed by Muhammed, presumably to be rewarded with houris in heaven.
Juan is a hero and is sent to Saint Petersburg, accompanied by the
Muslim girl, whom he makes a vow to protect. Her name, Leila, is only
revealed in Canto X.

### Canto IX {#canto_ix}

Dressed as a war hero in military uniform, Juan cuts a handsome figure
in the court of Catherine II, who lusts after him. She is about 48 years
old (historically, actually 61 or 62 years old) and \"just now in juicy
vigour\". He becomes one of her favorites and is flattered by her
interest as well as promoted for it. \"Love is vanity,/Selfish in its
beginning as its end,/Except where \'tis a mere insanity\". Juan still
lovingly cares for the Muslim girl he rescued.

### Canto X {#canto_x}

Juan falls ill because of the Russian cold and so is sent westward to
more temperate England. His job ostensibly is that of a special envoy
with the nebulous task of negotiating some treaty or other, but it is
nothing more than a sinecure to justify the Empress Catherine in
securing his health and loading him with money and expensive gifts.

### Canto XI {#canto_xi}

Juan lands in England and eventually makes his way to London where he is
found musing on the greatness of Britain as a defender of freedoms ---
until he is interrupted by a Cockney mugger, demanding money with
menace. Juan shoots the man and, being of strong conscience, then
regrets his haste and attempts to care for the dying mugger. However,
his efforts fail, and after muttering some last words the mugger dies on
the street. Later, Don Juan is received into the English court with the
usual wonder and admiration at his looks, dress and mien although not
without the jealousy of some of the older peers. In this Canto, Byron
mentions John Keats, \"who was kill\'d off by one critique\".

### Canto XII {#canto_xii}

Don Juan seeks out a suitable tutor and guardian for Leila, the orphan
from the destroyed city of Ismail. He finds one in Lady Pinchbeck, a
woman not unassailed by rumours on her chastity, but generally
considered a good person and an admirable wit.

### Canto XIII {#canto_xiii}

Lady Adeline Amundeville and her husband Lord Henry Amundeville host
Juan and others. She is \"the fair most fatal Juan ever met\", the
\"queen bee, the glass of all that\'s fair,/Whose charms made all men
speak and women dumb\". Diplomatic relations often bring Juan (\"the
envoy of a secret Russian mission\") and Lord Henry together, and he
befriends Juan and makes him a frequent guest at their London mansion.
The Amundevilles invite numerous distinguished guests for a party at
their country estate. The landscape surrounding the estate, as well as
the decor within their house is described. This is followed by a
mock-catalogues of the ladies, the gentlemen and the activities that
they participate in. Byron sees this whole party as English ennui. The
canto ends with all of them retiring for the evening.

### Canto XIV {#canto_xiv}

Juan acquits himself well on a fox hunt. He is attractive to the ladies,
including the Duchess of Fitz-Fulke, who begins to flirt with him. Lady
Adeline is jealous of the Duchess (who has had many amorous exploits),
and resolves to protect the \"inexperienced\" Juan from her enticements.
Juan and Adeline are both 21 years old. Lady Adeline has a vacant heart
and has a cold but proper marriage. She is not in love with Juan, but
the poet will only later divulge whether they have an affair (apparently
not). The popular saying \"truth is stranger than fiction\" originates
from this canto: \"\'Tis strange --- but true; for truth is always
strange; Stranger than fiction.\"

### Canto XV {#canto_xv}

Lady Adeline is at risk for losing her honour over Juan. Juan has a
seductive manner because he never seems anxious to seduce. He neither
brooks nor claims superiority. Adeline advises Juan to get married, but
he acknowledges the women he is attracted to tend to be already married.
Adeline tries to deduce a suitable match for Juan, but intentionally
omits mention of the 16-year-old and enticing Aurora Raby, a Catholic.
Juan is attracted to her --- she is purer than the rest, and reminds him
of his lost Haidée. An elaborate dinner is described in detail. Juan is
seated between Adeline and Aurora. Aurora has little to say initially,
and thaws only a little during the dinner.

### Canto XVI {#canto_xvi}

Juan is smitten with the beautiful Aurora, and thinks of her on
retiring. At night, he walks into the hall, viewing the gallery of
paintings. He hears footsteps, and sees a monk in cowl and beads. He
wonders if it is a ghost, or just a dream. He does not see the monk\'s
face, though he passes and repasses several times. The next morning in
reaction to how pale Juan looks, Adeline turns pale herself, the Duchess
of Fitz-Fulke looks at Juan hard, and Aurora surveys him \"with a kind
of calm surprise\". Adeline wonders if he is ill, and Lord Henry guesses
that he might have seen the \"Black Friar\". He relates the story of the
\"spirit of these walls\" who used to be seen often but had not been
seen of late. Lord Henry, himself, had seen the Black Friar on his
honeymoon. Adeline offers to sing the story of the ghost, accompanying
it on her harp. Aurora remains silent, but Lady Fitz-Fulke appears
mischievous after the song. The narrator suggests that Adeline had sung
this to laugh Juan out of his dismay. Juan attempts to lift his spirits,
as the house bustles in preparation for another feast. Before that,
however, a pregnant country girl and other petitioners present
themselves to Lord Henry in his capacity as Justice of the Peace. At the
banquet, Juan is preoccupied with his thoughts again. When he glances at
Aurora, he catches a smile on her cheek, but is uncertain of its
meaning, since Aurora sits pale and only a little flushed. Adeline goes
about her duties as hostess, while the Duchess of Fitz-Fulke is very
much at ease. They retire for the evening. Juan thinks about Aurora, who
has reawakened feelings in him which had lately been lost. After going
back to his room, he hears the tiptoe of footsteps again, after sitting
around in expectation of the ghost. His doors open, and again it is the
sable Friar concealed in his solemn hood. He pursues the friar up
against a wall, and then suddenly notices that the \"ghost\" has sweet
breath, a straggling curl, red lips, pearls, and a glowing bust. As the
hood falls down, the \"friar\" is revealed to be the voluptuous Duchess
of Fitz-Fulke.

### Canto XVII {#canto_xvii}

A Canto that Byron failed to complete but added to in the run up to his
death, it lacks any narrative and only barely mentions the protagonist.
It is instead a response to his critics who object to his views on the
grounds that \"If you are right, then everybody\'s wrong!\". In his
defence, he lists many great people who have been considered outsiders
and revolutionaries including Martin Luther and Galileo. The Canto ends
on the brink of resuming the storyline from Canto The Sixteenth where
Don Juan was left in a \"tender moonlit situation\".


# Ralph Ellison

## Invisible Man (1952)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invisible_Man>

The narrator, an unnamed black man, begins by describing his living
conditions: an underground room wired with hundreds of electric lights,
operated by power stolen from the city\'s electric grid. He reflects on
the various ways in which he has experienced social invisibility during
his life and begins to tell his story, returning to his teenage years.
The narrator lives in a small Southern town and, upon graduating from
high school, wins a scholarship to an all-black college. However, to
receive it, he must first take part in a brutal, humiliating battle
royal for the entertainment of the town\'s rich white dignitaries. One
afternoon during his junior year at the college, the narrator chauffeurs
Mr. Norton, a visiting rich white trustee, out among the old
slave-quarters beyond the campus. By chance, he stops at the cabin of
Jim Trueblood, who has caused a scandal by impregnating both his wife
and his daughter in his sleep. Trueblood\'s account horrifies Mr. Norton
so badly that he asks the narrator to find him a drink. The narrator
drives him to a bar filled with prostitutes and patients from a nearby
mental hospital. The mental patients rail against both of them and
eventually overwhelm the orderly assigned to keep the patients under
control. The narrator hurries an injured Mr. Norton away from the
chaotic scene and back to campus. Dr. Bledsoe, the college president,
excoriates the narrator for showing Mr. Norton the underside of black
life beyond the campus and expels him. However, Bledsoe gives several
sealed letters of recommendation to the narrator, to be delivered to
friends of the college in order to assist him in finding a job so that
he may eventually re-enroll. The narrator travels to New York and
distributes his letters, with no success; the son of one recipient shows
him the letter, which reveals Bledsoe\'s intent to never admit the
narrator as a student again. Acting on the son\'s suggestion, the
narrator seeks work at the Liberty Paint factory, renowned for its pure
white paint. He is assigned first to the shipping department, then to
the boiler room, whose chief attendant, Lucius Brockway, is highly
paranoid and suspects that the narrator is trying to take his job. This
distrust worsens after the narrator stumbles into a union meeting, and
Brockway attacks the narrator and tricks him into setting off an
explosion in the boiler room. The narrator is hospitalized and subjected
to shock treatment, overhearing the doctors\' discussion of him as a
possible mental patient. After leaving the hospital, the narrator faints
on the streets of Harlem and is taken in by Mary Rambo, a kindly
old-fashioned woman who reminds him of his relatives in the South. He
later happens across the eviction of an elderly black couple and makes
an impassioned speech that incites the crowd to attack the law
enforcement officials in charge of the proceedings. The narrator escapes
over the rooftops and is confronted by Brother Jack, the leader of a
group known as \"the Brotherhood\" that professes its commitment to
bettering conditions in Harlem and the rest of the world. At Jack\'s
urging, the narrator agrees to join and speak at rallies to spread the
word among the black community. Using his new salary, he pays Mary back
the rent he owes her and moves into an apartment provided by the
Brotherhood. The rallies go smoothly at first, with the narrator
receiving extensive indoctrination on the Brotherhood\'s ideology and
methods. Soon, though, he encounters trouble from Ras the Exhorter, a
fanatical black nationalist who believes that the Brotherhood is
controlled by whites. Neither the narrator nor Tod Clifton, a youth
leader within the Brotherhood, is particularly swayed by his words. The
narrator is later called before a meeting of the Brotherhood and accused
of putting his own ambitions ahead of the group. He is reassigned to
another part of the city to address issues concerning women, seduced by
the wife of a Brotherhood member, and eventually called back to Harlem
when Clifton is reported missing and the Brotherhood\'s membership and
influence begin to falter. The narrator can find no trace of Clifton at
first, but soon discovers him selling dancing Sambo dolls on the street,
having become disillusioned with the Brotherhood. Clifton is shot and
killed by a policeman while resisting arrest; at his funeral, the
narrator delivers a rousing speech that rallies the crowd to support the
Brotherhood again. At an emergency meeting, Jack and the other
Brotherhood leaders criticize the narrator for his unscientific
arguments and the narrator determines that the group has no real
interest in the black community\'s problems. The narrator returns to
Harlem, trailed by Ras\'s men, and buys a hat and a pair of sunglasses
to elude them. As a result, he is repeatedly mistaken for a man named
Rinehart, known as a lover, a hipster, a gambler, a briber, and a
spiritual leader. Understanding that Rinehart has adapted to white
society at the cost of his own identity, the narrator resolves to
undermine the Brotherhood by feeding them dishonest information
concerning the Harlem membership and situation. After seducing the wife
of one member in a fruitless attempt to learn their new activities, he
discovers that riots have broken out in Harlem due to widespread unrest.
He realizes that the Brotherhood has been counting on such an event in
order to further its own aims. The narrator gets mixed up with a gang of
looters, who burn down a tenement building, and wanders away from them
to find Ras, now on horseback, armed with a spear and shield, and
calling himself \"the Destroyer.\" Ras shouts for the crowd to lynch the
narrator, but the narrator attacks him with the spear and escapes into
an underground coal bin. Two white men seal him in, leaving him alone to
ponder the racism he has experienced in his life. The epilogue returns
to the present, with the narrator stating that he is ready to return to
the world because he has spent enough time hiding from it. He explains
that he has told his story in order to help people see past his own
invisibility, and also to provide a voice for people with a similar
plight: \"Who knows but that, on the lower frequencies, I speak for
you?\"


# Thomas Hardy

## Far from the Madding Crowd (1874)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Far_from_the_Madding_Crowd>

### Meeting, parting and reuniting {#meeting_parting_and_reuniting}

Gabriel Oak is a young shepherd. With the savings of a frugal life, and
a loan, he has leased and stocked a farm. He falls in love with a
newcomer eight years his junior, Bathsheba Everdene, a proud beauty who
arrives to live with her aunt. Over time, Bathsheba and Gabriel grow to
like each other well enough, and Bathsheba even saves his life once.
However, when he makes her an unadorned offer of marriage, she refuses;
she values her independence too much and him too little. After a few
days, she moves to Weatherbury, a village some miles off. When next they
meet, their circumstances have changed drastically. An inexperienced new
sheepdog drives Gabriel\'s flock over a cliff, ruining him. After
selling off everything of value, he manages to settle all his debts but
emerges penniless. He seeks employment at a hiring fair in the town of
Casterbridge. When he finds none, he heads to another such fair in
Shottsford, a town about ten miles from Weatherbury. On the way, he
happens upon a dangerous fire on a farm and leads the bystanders in
putting it out. When the veiled owner comes to thank him, he asks if she
needs a shepherd. She uncovers her face and reveals herself to be none
other than Bathsheba. She has recently inherited her uncle\'s estate and
is now wealthy. Though somewhat uncomfortable, she employs him.

### Bathsheba\'s valentine to Boldwood {#bathshebas_valentine_to_boldwood}

Meanwhile, Bathsheba gains a new admirer. William Boldwood is a
prosperous farmer of about 40, whose ardour Bathsheba unwittingly
awakens when she playfully sends him a valentine sealed with red wax on
which she has embossed the words \"Marry me\". Boldwood, not realising
the valentine was a jest, becomes obsessed with her and soon proposes
marriage. Although she does not love him, she toys with the idea of
accepting his offer; he is the most eligible bachelor in the district.
However, she avoids giving him a definite answer. When Gabriel rebukes
her for her thoughtlessness regarding Boldwood, she dismisses him. When
Bathsheba\'s sheep begin dying from bloat, she discovers to her chagrin
that Gabriel is the only man who knows how to cure them. Her pride
delays the inevitable, but finally she is forced to beg him for help.
Afterward, she offers him back his job, and their friendship is
restored.

### Sergeant Troy {#sergeant_troy}

At this point, the dashing Sergeant Francis \"Frank\" Troy returns to
his native Weatherbury and by chance encounters Bathsheba one night. Her
initial dislike turns to infatuation after he excites her with a private
display of swordsmanship. Gabriel observes Bathsheba\'s interest in the
young soldier and tries to discourage it, telling her she would be
better off marrying Boldwood. Boldwood becomes aggressive towards Troy,
and Bathsheba goes to Bath to prevent Troy returning to Weatherbury, as
she fears what might happen if Troy encountered Boldwood. On their
return, Boldwood offers his rival a large bribe to give up Bathsheba.
Troy pretends to consider the offer, then scornfully announces they are
already married. Boldwood withdraws, humiliated, and vows revenge.
Bathsheba soon discovers that her new husband is an improvident gambler
with little interest in farming. Worse, she begins to suspect he does
not love her. In fact, Troy\'s heart belongs to her former servant,
Fanny Robin. Before meeting Bathsheba, Troy had promised to marry Fanny;
on the wedding day, however, the luckless girl went to the wrong church.
She explained her mistake, but Troy, humiliated at being left at the
altar, angrily called off the wedding. When they parted, unbeknownst to
Troy, Fanny was pregnant with his child.

### Fanny Robin {#fanny_robin}

Some months later, Troy and Bathsheba encounter Fanny on the road,
destitute, as she painfully makes her way toward the Casterbridge
workhouse. Troy sends his wife onward, then gives Fanny all the money in
his pocket, telling her he will give her more in a few days. Fanny uses
up the last of her strength to reach her destination. A few hours later,
she dies in childbirth, along with the baby. Mother and child are then
placed in a coffin and sent home to Weatherbury for interment. Gabriel,
who knows of Troy\'s relationship with Fanny, tries to conceal the
child\'s existence -- but Bathsheba agrees that the coffin can be left
in her house overnight, from her sense of duty towards a former servant.
Her servant and confidante, Liddy, repeats the rumour that Fanny had a
child; when all the servants are in bed, Bathsheba unscrews the lid and
sees the two bodies inside. Troy then comes home from Casterbridge,
where he had gone to keep his appointment with Fanny. Seeing the reason
for her failure to meet him, he gently kisses the corpse and tells the
anguished Bathsheba, \"This woman is more to me, dead as she is, than
ever you were, or are, or can be\". The next day he spends all his money
on a marble tombstone with the inscription: \"Erected by Francis Troy in
beloved memory of Fanny Robin \...\" Then, loathing himself and unable
to bear Bathsheba\'s company, he leaves. After a long walk, he bathes in
the sea, leaving his clothes on the beach. A strong current carries him
away, but he is rescued by a rowing boat.

### Troy returns {#troy_returns}

A year later, with Troy presumed drowned, Boldwood renews his suit.
Burdened with guilt over the pain she has caused him, Bathsheba
reluctantly consents to marry him in six years, long enough to have Troy
declared dead. Troy tires of his hand-to-mouth existence as a travelling
actor and considers reclaiming his position and wife. He returns to
Weatherbury on Christmas Eve and goes to Boldwood\'s house, where a
party is under way. He orders Bathsheba to come with him; when she
shrinks back in shock and dismay, he seizes her arm, and she screams. At
this, Boldwood shoots Troy dead and tries unsuccessfully to turn the
double-barrelled gun on himself. Although Boldwood is convicted of
murder and sentenced to be hanged, his friends petition the Home
Secretary for mercy, claiming insanity. This is granted, and Boldwood\'s
sentence is commuted to \"confinement during Her Majesty\'s pleasure\".
Bathsheba buries her husband in the same grave as Fanny Robin and their
child.

### Gabriel triumphant {#gabriel_triumphant}

Throughout her tribulations, Bathsheba comes to rely increasingly on her
oldest and, as she admits to herself, only real friend, Gabriel. When he
gives notice that he is leaving her employ, she realises how important
he has become to her well-being. That night, she goes alone to visit him
in his cottage, to find out why he is deserting her. Pressed, he
reluctantly reveals that it is because people have been gossiping that
he wants to marry her. She exclaims that it is \"\... too absurd -- too
soon -- to think of, by far!\" He bitterly agrees that it is absurd, but
when she corrects him, saying that it is only \"too soon\", he is
emboldened to ask once again for her hand in marriage. She accepts, and
the two are quietly married.


# James Joyce

## Ulysses (1922)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulysses_(novel)>

### Part I: Telemachia {#part_i_telemachia}

#### Episode 1, Telemachus {#episode_1_telemachus}

It is 8 a.m. Buck Mulligan, a boisterous medical student, calls Stephen
Dedalus (a young writer encountered as the principal subject of A
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man) up to the roof of the Sandycove
Martello tower where they both live. There is tension between Stephen
and Mulligan, stemming from a cruel remark Stephen has overheard
Mulligan making about his recently deceased mother, May Dedalus, and
from the fact that Mulligan has invited an English student, Haines, to
stay with them. The three men eat breakfast and walk to the shore, where
Mulligan demands from Stephen the key to the tower and a loan.
Departing, Stephen declares that he will not return to the tower
tonight, as Mulligan, the \"usurper\", has taken it over.

#### Episode 2, Nestor {#episode_2_nestor}

Stephen is teaching a history class on the victories of Pyrrhus of
Epirus. After class, one student, Cyril Sargent, stays behind so that
Stephen can show him how to do a set of arithmetic exercises. Stephen
looks at the ugly face of Sargent and tries to imagine Sargent\'s
mother\'s love for him. Stephen then visits school headmaster Garrett
Deasy, from whom he collects his pay and a letter to take to a newspaper
office for printing. The two discuss Irish history and the role of Jews
in the economy. As Stephen leaves, Deasy said that Ireland has \"never
persecuted the Jews\" because the country \"never let them in\". This
episode is the source of some of the novel\'s most famous lines, such as
Dedalus\'s claim that \"history is a nightmare from which I am trying to
awake\" and that God is \"a shout in the street.\"

#### Episode 3, Proteus {#episode_3_proteus}

Stephen finds his way to Sandymount Strand and mopes around for some
time, mulling various philosophical concepts, his family, his life as a
student in Paris, and his mother\'s death. As Stephen reminisces and
ponders, he lies down among some rocks, watches a couple whose dog
urinates behind a rock, scribbles some ideas for poetry and picks his
nose. This chapter is characterised by a stream of consciousness
narrative style that changes focus wildly. Stephen\'s education is
reflected in the many obscure references and foreign phrases employed in
this episode, which have earned it a reputation for being one of the
book\'s most difficult chapters.

### Part II: Odyssey {#part_ii_odyssey}

#### Episode 4, Calypso {#episode_4_calypso}

The narrative shifts abruptly. The time is again 8 a.m., but the action
has moved across the city and to the second protagonist of the book,
Leopold Bloom, a part-Jewish advertising canvasser. The episode opens
with the famous line 'Mr. Leopold Bloom ate with relish the inner organs
of beasts and fowls.' Bloom, after starting to prepare breakfast,
decides to walk to a butcher to buy a pork kidney. Returning home, he
prepares breakfast and brings it with the mail to his wife Molly as she
lounges in bed. One of the letters is from her concert manager Blazes
Boylan, with whom Molly is having an affair. Bloom is aware that Molly
will welcome Boylan into her bed later that day, and is tormented by the
thought. Bloom reads a letter from their daughter Milly Bloom, who tells
him about her progress in the photography business in Mullingar. The
episode closes with Bloom reading a magazine story titled Matcham's
Masterstroke, by Mr. Philip Beaufoy, while defecating in the outhouse.

#### Episode 5, Lotus Eaters {#episode_5_lotus_eaters}

Bloom makes his way to Westland Row post office, where he receives a
love letter from one \'Martha Clifford\' addressed to his pseudonym,
\'Henry Flower\'. He meets an acquaintance, and while they chat, Bloom
attempts to ogle a woman wearing stockings, but is prevented by a
passing tram. Next, he reads the letter and tears up the envelope in an
alley. He wanders into a Catholic church service and muses on theology.
The priest has the letters I.N.R.I. or I.H.S. on his back; Molly had
told Bloom that they meant I have sinned or I have suffered, and Iron
nails ran in. He goes to a chemist where he buys a bar of lemon soap. He
then meets another acquaintance, Bantam Lyons, who mistakenly takes him
to be offering a racing tip for the horse Throwaway. Finally, Bloom
heads towards the baths.

#### Episode 6, Hades {#episode_6_hades}

The episode begins with Bloom entering a funeral carriage with three
others, including Stephen\'s father. They drive to Paddy Dignam\'s
funeral, making small talk on the way. The carriage passes both Stephen
and Blazes Boylan. There is discussion of various forms of death and
burial, and Bloom is preoccupied by thoughts of his dead son, Rudy, and
the suicide of his own father. They enter the chapel into the service
and subsequently leave with the coffin cart. Bloom sees a mysterious man
wearing a mackintosh during the burial. Bloom continues to reflect upon
death, but at the end of the episode rejects morbid thoughts to embrace
\'warm fullblooded life\'.

#### Episode 7, Aeolus {#episode_7_aeolus}

At the office of the Freeman\'s Journal, Bloom attempts to place an ad.
Although initially encouraged by the editor, he is unsuccessful. Stephen
arrives bringing Deasy\'s letter about \'foot and mouth\' disease, but
Stephen and Bloom do not meet. Stephen leads the editor and others to a
pub, relating an anecdote on the way about \'two Dublin vestals\'. The
episode is broken into short segments by newspaper-style headlines, and
is characterised by an abundance of rhetorical figures and devices.

#### Episode 8, Lestrygonians {#episode_8_lestrygonians}

Bloom\'s thoughts are peppered with references to food as lunchtime
approaches. He meets an old flame, hears news of Mina Purefoy\'s labour,
and helps a blind boy cross the street. He enters the restaurant of the
Burton Hotel, where he is revolted by the sight of men eating like
animals. He goes instead to Davy Byrne\'s pub, where he consumes a
gorgonzola cheese sandwich and a glass of burgundy, and muses upon the
early days of his relationship with Molly and how the marriage has
declined: \'Me. And me now.\' Bloom\'s thoughts touch on what goddesses
and gods eat and drink. He ponders whether the statues of Greek
goddesses in the National Museum have anuses as do mortals. On leaving
the pub Bloom heads toward the museum, but spots Boylan across the
street and, panicking, rushes into the gallery across the street from
the museum.

#### Episode 9, Scylla and Charybdis {#episode_9_scylla_and_charybdis}

At the National Library, Stephen explains to some scholars his
biographical theory of the works of Shakespeare, especially Hamlet,
which he claims are based largely on the posited adultery of
Shakespeare\'s wife. Bloom enters the National Library to look up an old
copy of the ad he has been trying to place. He encounters Stephen
briefly and unknowingly at the end of the episode.

#### Episode 10, Wandering Rocks {#episode_10_wandering_rocks}

In this episode, nineteen short vignettes depict the wanderings of
various characters, major and minor, through the streets of Dublin.
Included among these is a brief scene between Mulligan and Haines at a
coffeehouse patronized by the chess-playing brother of Irish hero
Charles Stewart Parnell, in which Haines and Mulligan discuss Stephen\'s
predicament. The scene is a type of ekphrasis in that Mulligan\'s
pronouncements, that the Catholic education system \"drove
\[Stephen\'s\] wits astray\" and that Stephen \"will never capture the
Attic note,\" point to a central tension in the novel between
contemplation and action, a tension best summarized elsewhere in Matthew
Arnold\'s essay Hebraism and Hellenism, which Joyce read and enjoyed.
The episode ends with an account of the cavalcade of the Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, William Ward, Earl of Dudley, through the streets, which is
encountered by various characters from the novel.

#### Episode 11, Sirens {#episode_11_sirens}

In this episode, dominated by motifs of music, Bloom has dinner with
Stephen\'s uncle at a hotel, while Molly\'s lover, Blazes Boylan,
proceeds to his rendezvous with her. While dining, Bloom watches the
seductive barmaids and listens to the singing of Stephen\'s father and
others.

#### Episode 12, Cyclops {#episode_12_cyclops}

This chapter is narrated by an unnamed denizen of Dublin. The narrator
goes to Barney Kiernan\'s pub where he meets a character referred to
only as \"The Citizen\". There is a belief that this character is a
satirization of Michael Cusack, a founder member of the Gaelic Athletic
Association. When Leopold Bloom enters the pub, he is berated by the
Citizen, who is a fierce Fenian and anti-Semite. The episode ends with
Bloom reminding the Citizen that his Saviour was a Jew. As Bloom leaves
the pub, the Citizen, in anger, throws a biscuit tin at Bloom\'s head,
but misses. The chapter is marked by extended tangents made in voices
other than that of the unnamed narrator: these include streams of legal
jargon, Biblical passages, and elements of Irish mythology.

#### Episode 13, Nausicaa {#episode_13_nausicaa}

All the action of the episode takes place on the rocks of Sandymount
Strand, a shoreline area to the southeast of central Dublin. A young
woman named Gerty MacDowell is seated on the rocks with her two friends,
Cissy Caffrey and Edy Boardman. The girls are taking care of three
children, a baby, and four-year-old twins named Tommy and Jacky. Gerty
contemplates love, marriage and femininity as night falls. The reader is
gradually made aware that Bloom is watching her from a distance. Gerty
teases the onlooker by exposing her legs and underwear, and Bloom, in
turn, masturbates. Bloom\'s masturbatory climax is echoed by the
fireworks at the nearby bazaar. As Gerty leaves, Bloom realises that she
has a lame leg, and believes this is the reason she has been 'left on
the shelf'. After several mental digressions he decides to visit Mina
Purefoy at the maternity hospital. It is uncertain how much of the
episode is Gerty\'s thoughts, and how much is Bloom\'s sexual fantasy.
Some believe that the episode is divided into two halves: the first half
the highly romanticized viewpoint of Gerty, and the other half that of
the older and more realistic Bloom. Joyce himself said, however, that
'nothing happened between \[Gerty and Bloom\]. It all took place in
Bloom's imagination'. 'Nausicaa' attracted immense notoriety while the
book was being published in serial form. It has also attracted great
attention from scholars of disability in literature. The style of the
first half of the episode borrows from (and parodies) romance magazines
and novelettes.

#### Episode 14, Oxen of the Sun {#episode_14_oxen_of_the_sun}

Bloom visits the maternity hospital where Mina Purefoy is giving birth,
and finally meets Stephen, who has been drinking with his medical
student friends and is awaiting the promised arrival of Buck Mulligan.
As the only father in the group of men, Bloom is concerned about Mina
Purefoy in her labour. He starts thinking about his wife and the births
of his two children. He also thinks about the loss of his only 'heir',
Rudy. The young men become boisterous, and even start talking about
topics such as fertility, contraception and abortion. There is also a
suggestion that Milly, Bloom\'s daughter, is in a relationship with one
of the young men, Bannon. They continue on to a pub to continue
drinking, following the successful birth of a son to Mina Purefoy. This
chapter is remarkable for Joyce\'s wordplay, which, among other things,
recapitulates the entire history of the English language. After a short
incantation, the episode starts with latinate prose, Anglo-Saxon
alliteration, and moves on through parodies of, among others, Malory,
the King James Bible, Bunyan, Pepys, Defoe, Sterne, Walpole, Gibbon,
Dickens, and Carlyle, before concluding in a haze of nearly
incomprehensible slang. The development of the English language in the
episode is believed to be aligned with the nine-month gestation period
of the foetus in the womb.

#### Episode 15, Circe {#episode_15_circe}

Episode 15 is written as a play script, complete with stage directions.
The plot is frequently interrupted by \"hallucinations\" experienced by
Stephen and Bloom---fantastic manifestations of the fears and passions
of the two characters. Stephen and Lynch walk into Nighttown, Dublin\'s
red-light district. Bloom pursues them and eventually finds them at
Bella Cohen\'s brothel where, in the company of her workers including
Zoe Higgins, Florry Talbot and Kitty Ricketts, he has a series of
hallucinations regarding his sexual fetishes, fantasies and
transgressions. Bloom is put in the dock to answer charges by a variety
of sadistic, accusing women including Mrs Yelverton Barry, Mrs
Bellingham and the Hon Mrs Mervyn Talboys. When Bloom witnesses Stephen
overpaying for services received, Bloom decides to hold onto the rest of
Stephen\'s money for safekeeping. Stephen hallucinates that the rotting
cadaver of his mother has risen up from the floor to confront him.
Terrified, Stephen uses his walking stick to smash a chandelier and then
runs out. Bloom quickly pays Bella for the damage, then runs after
Stephen. Bloom finds Stephen engaged in a heated argument with an
English soldier, Private Carr, who, after a perceived insult to the
King, punches Stephen. The police arrive and the crowd disperses. As
Bloom is tending to Stephen, Bloom has a hallucination of Rudy, his
deceased child.

### Part III: Nostos {#part_iii_nostos}

#### Episode 16, Eumaeus {#episode_16_eumaeus}

Bloom and Stephen go to the cabman\'s shelter to restore the latter to
his senses. At the cabman\'s shelter, they encounter a drunken sailor
named D. B. Murphy (W. B. Murphy in the 1922 text). The episode is
dominated by the motif of confusion and mistaken identity, with Bloom,
Stephen and Murphy\'s identities being repeatedly called into question.
The rambling and laboured style of the narrative in this episode
reflects the nervous exhaustion and confusion of the two protagonists.

#### Episode 17, Ithaca {#episode_17_ithaca}

Bloom returns home with Stephen, makes him a cup of cocoa, discusses
cultural and lingual differences between them, considers the possibility
of publishing Stephen\'s parable stories, and offers him a place to stay
for the night. Stephen refuses Bloom\'s offer and is ambiguous in
response to Bloom\'s proposal of future meetings. The two men urinate in
the backyard, Stephen departs and wanders off into the night, and Bloom
goes to bed, where Molly is sleeping. She awakens and questions him
about his day. The episode is written in the form of a rigidly organised
and \"mathematical\" catechism of 309 questions and answers, and was
reportedly Joyce\'s favourite episode in the novel. The deep
descriptions range from questions of astronomy to the trajectory of
urination and include a famous list of 25 men perceived as Molly\'s
lovers (apparently corresponding to the suitors slain at Ithaca by
Odysseus and Telemachus in The Odyssey), including Boylan, and Bloom\'s
psychological reaction to their assignation. While describing events
apparently chosen randomly in ostensibly precise mathematical or
scientific terms, the episode is rife with errors made by the undefined
narrator, many or most of which are intentional by Joyce.

#### Episode 18, Penelope {#episode_18_penelope}

The final episode consists of Molly Bloom\'s thoughts as she lies in bed
next to her husband. The episode uses a stream-of-consciousness
technique in eight paragraphs and lacks punctuation. Molly thinks about
Boylan and Bloom, her past admirers, including Lieutenant Stanley G.
Gardner, the events of the day, her childhood in Gibraltar, and her
curtailed singing career. She also hints at a lesbian relationship, in
her youth, with a childhood friend named Hester Stanhope. These thoughts
are occasionally interrupted by distractions, such as a train whistle or
the need to urinate. The episode famously concludes with Molly\'s
remembrance of Bloom\'s marriage proposal, and of her acceptance: \"he
asked me would I yes to say yes my mountain flower and first I put my
arms around him yes and drew him down to me so he could feel my breasts
all perfume yes and his heart was going like mad and yes I said yes I
will Yes.\" The episode is also concerned with the occurrence of
Molly\'s early menstrual period. She considers the proximity of her
period following her extra-marital affairs with Boylan, and believes her
menstrual condition is the reason for her increased sexual appetite.
Molly corresponds to Penelope in Homer\'s epic poem, who is known for
her fidelity to Odysseus during his twenty-year absence, despite having
many suitors.


# Vladimir Nabokov

## Pale Fire (1962)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pale_Fire>

Shade\'s poem digressively describes many aspects of his life. Canto 1
includes his early encounters with death and glimpses of what he takes
to be the supernatural. Canto 2 is about his family and the apparent
suicide of his daughter, Hazel Shade. Canto 3 focuses on Shade\'s search
for knowledge about an afterlife, culminating in a \"faint hope\" in
higher powers \"playing a game of worlds\" as indicated by apparent
coincidences. Canto 4 offers details on Shade\'s daily life and creative
process, as well as thoughts on his poetry, which he finds to be a means
of somehow understanding the universe. In Kinbote\'s editorial
contributions he tells three stories intermixed with each other. One is
his own story, notably including what he thinks of as his friendship
with Shade. After Shade was murdered, Kinbote acquired the manuscript,
including some variants, and has taken it upon himself to oversee the
poem\'s publication, telling readers that it lacks only line 1000.
Kinbote\'s second story deals with King Charles II, \"The Beloved\", the
deposed king of Zembla. King Charles escaped imprisonment by
Soviet-backed revolutionaries, making use of a secret passage and brave
adherents in disguise. Kinbote repeatedly claims that he inspired Shade
to write the poem by recounting King Charles\'s escape to him and that
possible allusions to the king, and to Zembla, appear in Shade\'s poem,
especially in rejected drafts. However, no explicit reference to King
Charles is to be found in the poem. Kinbote\'s third story is that of
Gradus, an assassin dispatched by the new rulers of Zembla to kill the
exiled King Charles. Gradus makes his way from Zembla through Europe and
America to New Wye, suffering comic mishaps. In the last note, to the
missing line 1000, Kinbote narrates how Gradus killed Shade by mistake.
Towards the end of the narrative, Kinbote all but states that he is in
fact the exiled King Charles, living incognito; however, enough details
throughout the story, as well as direct statements of ambiguous
sincerity by Kinbote towards the novel\'s end, suggest that King Charles
and Zembla are both fictitious. In the latter interpretation, Kinbote is
delusional and has built an elaborate picture of Zembla complete with
samples of a constructed language as a by-product of insanity;
similarly, Gradus was simply an unhinged man trying to kill Shade, and
his backstory as a revolutionary assassin is also made up. In an
interview, Nabokov later claimed that Kinbote committed suicide after
finishing the book. The critic Michael Wood has stated, \"This is
authorial trespassing, and we don\'t have to pay attention to it\", but
Brian Boyd has argued that internal evidence points to Kinbote\'s
suicide. One of Kinbote\'s annotations to Shade\'s poem (corresponding
to line 493) addresses the subject of suicide at some length.


# Chuck Palahniuk

## Fight Club (1996)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fight_Club_(novel)>

Fight Club centers on an anonymous narrator, who works as a product
recall specialist for an unnamed car company. Because of the stress of
his job and the jet lag brought upon by frequent business trips, he
begins to suffer from recurring insomnia. When he seeks treatment, his
doctor advises him to visit a support group for testicular cancer
victims to \"see what real suffering is like\". He finds that sharing
the problems of others---despite not having testicular cancer
himself---alleviates his insomnia. The narrator\'s unique treatment
works until he meets Marla Singer, another \"tourist\" who visits the
support group under false pretenses. The possibly disturbed Marla
reminds the narrator that he is a faker who does not belong there. He
begins to hate Marla for keeping him from crying, and, therefore, from
sleeping. After a confrontation, the two agree to attend separate
support group meetings to avoid each other. The truce is uneasy, and the
narrator\'s insomnia returns. While on a nude beach, the narrator meets
Tyler Durden, a charismatic extremist of mysterious means. After an
explosion destroys the narrator\'s condominium, he asks to stay at
Tyler\'s house. Tyler agrees, but asks for something in return: \"I want
you to hit me as hard as you can.\" Both men find that they enjoy the
ensuing fistfight. They subsequently move in together and establish a
\"fight club\", drawing numerous men with similar temperaments into
bare-knuckle fighting matches, set to the following rules:

You don\'t talk about fight club. You don\'t talk about fight club. When
someone says stop, or goes limp, the fight is over. Only two guys to a
fight. One fight at a time. They fight without shirts or shoes. The
fights go on as long as they have to. If this is your first night at
fight club, you have to fight. Later in the book, a mechanic tells the
narrator about two new rules of the fight club: nobody is the center of
the fight club except for the two men fighting, and the fight club will
always be free. Marla, noticing that the narrator has not recently
attended his support groups, calls him to claim that she has overdosed
on Xanax in a half-hearted suicide attempt. Tyler returns from work,
picks up the phone to Marla\'s drug-induced rambling, and rescues her.
Tyler and Marla embark on an uneasy affair that confounds the narrator
and confuses Marla. Throughout this affair, Marla is unaware both of
fight club\'s existence and the interaction between Tyler and the
narrator. Because Tyler and Marla are never seen at the same time, the
narrator wonders whether Tyler and Marla are the same person. As fight
club attains a nationwide presence, Tyler uses it to spread his
anti-consumerist ideas, recruiting fight club\'s members to participate
in increasingly elaborate pranks on corporate America. He eventually
gathers the most devoted fight club members and forms \"Project
Mayhem\", a cult-like organization that trains itself as an army to
bring down modern civilization. This organization, like fight club, is
controlled by a set of rules:

You don\'t ask questions. You don\'t ask questions. No excuses. No lies.
You have to trust Tyler. While initially a loyal participant in Project
Mayhem, the narrator becomes uncomfortable with the increasing
destructiveness of its activities. He resolves to stop Tyler and his
followers when Bob, a friend from the testicular cancer support group,
is killed during one of Project Mayhem\'s sabotage operations. The
narrator then learns that he himself is Tyler Durden. As the narrator\'s
mental state deteriorated, his mind formed a new personality that was
able to escape from the problems of his life. Marla inadvertently
reveals to the narrator that he and Tyler are the same person. Tyler\'s
affair with Marla---whom the narrator professes to dislike---was the
narrator\'s own affair with Marla. The narrator\'s bouts of insomnia had
been Tyler\'s personality surfacing; Tyler was active whenever the
narrator was \"sleeping\". The Tyler personality not only created fight
club, he also blew up the Narrator\'s condo. Tyler plans to blow up a
skyscraper using homemade bombs created by Project Mayhem; the target of
the explosion is the nearby national museum. Tyler plans to die as a
martyr during this event, taking the narrator\'s life as well. Realizing
this, the narrator sets out to stop Tyler, although Tyler is always
thinking ahead of him. The narrator makes his way to the roof of the
building, where Tyler holds him at gunpoint. When Marla comes to the
roof with one of the support groups, Tyler vanishes, as Tyler \"was his
hallucination, not hers.\"With Tyler gone, the narrator waits for the
bomb to explode and kill him. The bomb malfunctions because Tyler mixed
paraffin into the explosives. Still alive and holding Tyler\'s gun, the
narrator makes the first decision that is truly his own: he puts the gun
in his mouth and shoots himself. Some time later, he awakens in a mental
hospital, believing he is in Heaven, and imagines an argument with God
over human nature. The book ends with the narrator being approached by
hospital employees who reveal themselves to be Project members. They
tell him their plans still continue, and that they are expecting Tyler
to come back.


# Salman Rushdie

## Midnight's Children (1981)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Midnight's_Children>

Midnight\'s Children is a loose allegory for events in India both before
and, primarily, after the independence and partition of India. The
protagonist and narrator of the story is Saleem Sinai, born at the exact
moment when India became an independent country. He was born with
telepathic powers, as well as an enormous and constantly dripping nose
with an extremely sensitive sense of smell. The novel is divided into
three books. The book begins with the story of the Sinai family,
particularly with events leading up to India\'s Independence and
Partition. Saleem is born precisely at midnight, 15 August 1947,
therefore, exactly as old as independent India. He later discovers that
all children born in India between 12 a.m. and 1 a.m. on that date are
imbued with special powers. Saleem, using his telepathic powers,
assembles a Midnight Children\'s Conference, reflective of the issues
India faced in its early statehood concerning the cultural, linguistic,
religious, and political differences faced by a vastly diverse nation.
Saleem acts as a telepathic conduit, bringing hundreds of geographically
disparate children into contact while also attempting to discover the
meaning of their gifts. In particular, those children born closest to
the stroke of midnight wield more powerful gifts than the others. Shiva
\"of the Knees\", Saleem\'s nemesis, and Parvati, called
\"Parvati-the-witch,\" are two of these children with notable gifts and
roles in Saleem\'s story. Meanwhile, Saleem\'s family begin a number of
migrations and endure the numerous wars which plague the subcontinent.
During this period he also suffers amnesia until he enters a
quasi-mythological exile in the jungle of Sundarban, where he is
re-endowed with his memory. In doing so, he reconnects with his
childhood friends. Saleem later becomes involved with the Indira
Gandhi-proclaimed Emergency and her son Sanjay\'s \"cleansing\" of the
Jama Masjid slum. For a time Saleem is held as a political prisoner;
these passages contain scathing criticisms of Indira Gandhi\'s
over-reach during the Emergency as well as a personal lust for power
bordering on godhood. The Emergency signals the end of the potency of
the Midnight Children, and there is little left for Saleem to do but
pick up the few pieces of his life he may still find and write the
chronicle that encompasses both his personal history and that of his
still-young nation, a chronicle written for his son, who, like his
father, is both chained and supernaturally endowed by history.


# Sir Walter Scott

## Rob Roy (1817)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rob_Roy_(novel)>

Francis \"Frank\" Osbaldistone tells his tale, beginning with his return
to his father William\'s merchant house of Osbaldistone and Tresham in
Crane Alley, London, from an apprenticeship in a French associate\'s
business. There, he meets with his business-minded father\'s anger and
disappointment, since he has been more preoccupied with writing poetry
than learning the business, much to his father\'s disgust. William was
originally disinherited in favour of his younger brother Sir Hildebrand
Osbaldistone, who has inherited both the family fortune and the family
seat of Osbaldistone Hall instead. William, turned out at the age of his
own son, has built a successful business with his trading company in the
City and is a dissenter in religion, unlike his brother. Owen, the Head
Clerk of Osbaldistone and Tresham and a long time friend of the family,
attempts to persuade Frank to follow his father\'s wishes. Frank is not
swayed. Instead, William sends him to stay with his uncle Hildebrand in
Northumberland, near the border with Scotland. Frank sets out on
horseback, meeting some travellers on the way. He observes that one of
the travellers is nervous and protective of a box that he carries. Frank
begins to tease the traveller, Morris, pretending to assume an interest
in the mysterious box. At an inn, they are joined by a confident and
sociable Scottish \"cattle dealer" Campbell. They eat and drink and
discuss politics together at an inn and then part ways, when Morris
entreats Campbell to travel with him to provide protection, since
Campbell has recounted how he thwarted two highwaymen singlehandedly.
After Frank parts from the company near his destination, he encounters a
fox hunt in progress. A lovely young huntress, dressed in riding habit,
greets him and guesses his identity. Frank is smitten by the young
woman, noting her intelligence and beauty along with her independent
manner. She is Diana \"Die\" Vernon, a relative by marriage of Sir
Hildebrand. They proceed to Osbaldistone Hall, a large, rambling and
run-down old manor-house, filled with massive old furniture, rusted
suits of armour, hunting trophies, marking the interests of his uncle
and cousins. Frank meets old Sir Hildebrand, a former Cavalier, and his
five older sons, each described by Die as given entirely to drinking and
sport. At dinner, he meets the youngest brother, Rashleigh, who, unlike
his father and brothers, is sober, charming and erudite. Frank notes a
connection between Die and Rashleigh. Die explains that Rashleigh, a
scholar intended for the priesthood, is her tutor. The next day, after
encountering Andrew Fairservice the gardener, a loquacious Scotsman,
Diana tells Frank that he has been charged with robbery and that the
local Justice of the Peace Squire Inglewood, has a warrant for his
arrest. Rather than flee to Scotland, he determines to protest his
innocence. Die guides him and they encounter Rashleigh, who claims to
have been pleading Frank\'s case. After declaring his innocence to the
Justice, Frank confronts his accuser, who is none other than Morris.
Morris, a government paymaster, has been robbed of his mysterious box,
which contained gold specie with which to pay the English troops in the
area. Frank\'s prior light-hearted interest in Morris\' box on the
journey north is the basis for the charge. Upon Frank\'s vehement
declaration of innocence, and the Justice\'s sympathetic acquittal,
Morris abandons his suit against Frank. Jobson, the Squire\'s pedantic
and officious clerk, wants to pursue the matter on legal principle.
After diverting Jobson by sending him on wild-goose chase, Rashleigh
departs and quickly returns with the cattle-dealer, Campbell. Campbell
witnesses truthfully that he was at the scene of the robbery and did not
see Frank. Freed by the Squire from the charge, Frank returns to
Osbaldistone Hall. He is consumed with jealousy after discovering that
Rashleigh was in serious consideration for Die\'s hand in marriage; the
usually sober Frank gets drunk with the family after Die exits, and
strikes Rashleigh during an argument. In the morning, Frank apologises
sincerely but Rashleigh\'s too-quick forgiveness rings false. Rashleigh
travels to take Frank\'s place at Osbaldistone and Tresham. Diana warns
Frank that Rashleigh is a subtle and dangerous conniver, and has her
under his power. Frank begins to tutor Die and falls even more deeply in
love with her. In between hours in the library with Die or in hunting
with his cousins, he converses with Andrew Fairservice and learns much
about goings on at the Hall: there are suspicious visitations by shadowy
persons unknown; the servants fear a ghost that haunts the library; and
a mysterious Catholic priest, Father Vaughan, visits the hall. Frank
receives a letter from Tresham asking him to meet Owen in Glasgow and,
only then, realises that none of his letters have reached London,
including one warning his father of Rashleigh\'s dubious character. Die
informs him that while William has been on the continent, Rashleigh has
absconded with financial instruments vital to Osbaldistone and
Tresham\'s solvency. Frank determines to help his father\'s business. He
parts with Diana. She is destined to live in a convent due to a family
compact (in which she has no say), as she refuses to marry any of Sir
Hildebrand\'s sons. He enlists Andrew Fairservice as his servant and
guide and hurries to Glasgow to find Owen and catch Rashleigh, who is
now understood to be a Jacobite agent and agitator.

They lodge in Glasgow, and at services in a famous kirk in the religious
town, an unseen stranger presses a note into Frank\'s hand telling him
he is in danger and to meet him on a well-known bridge at midnight for
information. Frank meets the stranger, who conveys him to the tolbooth
(jail), which they enter unchallenged. Inside they find Owen, who is
overjoyed to see Frank. Osbaldistone and Tresham\'s favoured Scottish
trading partner, MacVitie, maliciously made Owen a debtor on behalf of
his now insolvent employer and imprisoned him. Bailie Nicol Jarvie, a
Glasgow magistrate who is also a Scottish partner of Osbaldistone and
Tresham, arrives at the jail after midnight, when Sabbath is over. The
mysterious stranger is Campbell, whom Jarvie recognises as his kinsman,
Rob Roy McGregor. On Rob\'s promise to repay Jarvie 1000 Scots pounds
that he owes him, Jarvie never says his name. Jarvie frees Owen, and
allows Frank and Campbell to leave. The absent turnkey (jailer), who has
let them pass in and out freely, is Rob Roy\'s man, Dougal. Before
disappearing with Dougal, Rob tells Frank to meet him in his Highland
home and suggests that Bailie Jarvie should accompany him to collect his
gold. While Jarvie and Owen discuss finances, Frank takes a walk to the
University grounds, where he spies Rashleigh walking with Morris and
MacVitie. Frank confronts Rashleigh and they duel. Rob Roy breaks it up.
After Rob sends Rashleigh away, he tells Frank to meet him at the
Clachan of Aberfoyle in the Highlands. Frank now realises that Rob\'s
affairs are entwined with his own and that Rob has had a long
association with Rashleigh and Die. Frank, Jarvie and Andrew ride to the
Clachan, where they find a rude country inn. Tired, cold and hungry,
they enter over the objections of the landlady and the three men in
plaids, drinking brandy at a table. A brief brawl ensues between the two
parties, which is broken up by a fourth Highlander who has been sleeping
on the floor. This man disappears, as Frank recognises him as Dougal,
Rob\'s man. Frank and Jarvie converse with the men in plaid, and find
they are the leaders of bands of armed men. Two are Highlanders; the
second is a Lowland chief, Duncan Galbraith, who heads the Lennox
militia. All have been enlisted by the English army to find and arrest
Rob Roy. Thus Rob Roy does not meet them at the inn, but sends a note to
Frank to meet at his home. Suddenly, an English patrol enters the inn,
dragging Dougal with them. Frank and Jarvie are arrested as they fit the
descriptions of the two people whom the patrol seeks. The soldiers force
Dougal to lead them to Rob\'s lair, bringing Frank, Jarvie and Andrew
along. They are ambushed by Highlanders, and the patrol is disarmed.
Dougal, playing the fool, has led the patrol into a trap. The leader of
the Highlanders is Helen, Rob\'s wife, a fierce, proud noblewoman, fully
armed. Her band is composed mostly of old men, women and children. After
declaiming the wrongs done to her and her clan, she produces the
unfortunate Morris, now a hostage, and he is callously thrown into the
nearby loch. The fighting men of the band, armed for battle, and led by
Rob\'s two sons arrive. They report that Rob has been captured by the
Duke\'s army. After Jarvie successfully appeals for clemency for them
from Helen, pleading kinship, Frank is sent as emissary to the Duke\'s
camp. He finds Rob is tied up for execution. The Duke\'s army sets off,
but Rob escapes in crossing the river. Frank lays low in the confusion
that ensues. Then he walks in the dark night along a path through the
forest back to the Clachan. He meets Diana and a stranger, an older
nobleman, riding on the path. Die gives him the missing bills that
Rashleigh had taken and bids him adieu. Frank sadly assumes that the man
is Diana\'s husband. Frank is overtaken by Rob, who takes him to his
home, after expressing anger at Morris\' murder. There, Jarvie and
Andrew are already ensconced. Jarvie reviews the recovered bills and
declares Osbaldistone and Tresham to be cleared of debt. Rob repays
Jarvie with 1000 pounds of gold louis d\'or. During the night, Rob tells
Frank of how he and Rashleigh robbed Morris -- a lark for Rob as an
accomplished cattle-thief and blackmailer, but serious business for
Rashleigh as a Jacobite agent. By now, Rashleigh has become a turncoat
to save his skin and flees to Stirling as a traitor to the Jacobite
cause. Frank and Jarvie are sent on their way homeward to Glasgow, after
an emotional farewell from Rob, Helen, and their clansmen. In Glasgow
Frank is greeted with warmth and forgiveness by his father, who has
prospered while on the continent. In gratitude for his assistance and
even-handedness, William rewards Bailie Jarvie with the commercial
accounts that he has stripped from MacVitie. While finishing up their
business in Glasgow, a rebellion of Jacobites breaks out. Frank, his
father, and Owen, escape to London, where Frank levies a company of
soldiers and rides north to support King George\'s cause. The rebellion
is quickly suppressed, and back in London, Frank learns of the downfall
of Sir Hildebrand (who has been captured and imprisoned in Newgate) and
deaths of Sir Hildebrand\'s five older sons through misfortune or
battle. Frank is heir to Osbaldistone Hall by his uncle\'s last will.
Rashleigh, the surviving son, has been disinherited in favour of Frank
as punishment by his father. Frank travels to claim the property. He
meets with Justice Inglewood to review his uncle\'s will and learns from
him that Diana and her father are thought to be out of England now; she
is single and her father was deeply involved with the Rebellion, and he
had visited Die in the role of Father Vaughan. This was the secret that
Rashleigh held over her. With Andrew Fairservice, Frank takes possession
of Osbaldistone Hall. Nostalgically selecting the library to sleep in,
he finds Diana and her father hiding there. They request sanctuary as
they are being hunted due to the failure of the Jacobite uprising. They
tell Frank how Sir Frederick had been hidden at the Hall during his
earlier stay. They plan to leave, but Rashleigh arrives with Jobson and
the local constables, bringing a warrant to take possession of the Hall
and arrest the Vernons and Frank. They are easily captured and taken
away in a carriage. Still on the property, Rob Roy springs an ambush,
freeing them all and killing Rashleigh. Rob Roy and his men bring Diana
and her father to safety in France. Not many months later, after Frank
begins working with his father, they learn that Diana\'s father is dying
in France, and allows his daughter to make her own choice of the convent
or marriage. Frank tells his father of his love for Diana. He gains his
father\'s approval to marry a Catholic, as startling to him as his son
owning Osbaldistone Hall.


# John Steinbeck

## The Grapes of Wrath (1939)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Grapes_of_Wrath>

The narrative begins just after Tom Joad is paroled from McAlester
prison, where he had been incarcerated after being convicted of
homicide. While hitchhiking to his home near Sallisaw, Oklahoma, Tom
meets former preacher Jim Casy, whom he remembers from his childhood,
and the two travel together. When they arrive at Tom\'s childhood farm
home, they find it deserted. Disconcerted and confused, Tom and Casy
meet their old neighbor, Muley Graves, who tells them the family has
gone to stay at Uncle John Joad\'s home nearby. Graves tells them that
the banks have evicted all the farmers, but he refuses to leave the
area. The next morning, Tom and Casy go to Uncle John\'s. Tom finds his
family loading their remaining possessions into a Hudson sedan converted
into a truck; with their crops destroyed by the Dust Bowl, the family
has defaulted on their bank loans, and their farm has been repossessed.
The family sees no option but to seek work in California, which has been
described in handbills as fruitful and offering high pay. The Joads put
everything they have into making the journey. Although leaving Oklahoma
would violate his parole, Tom decides it is worth the risk, and invites
Casy to join him and his family. Traveling west on Route 66, the Joad
family finds the road crowded with other migrants. In makeshift camps,
they hear many stories from others, some returning from California, and
the group worries that California may not actually be as promising as it
seems. The family dwindles as well: Grandpa dies along the road, and
they bury him in a field; Grandma dies close to the California state
line; and both Noah (the eldest Joad son) and Connie Rivers (the husband
of the pregnant Joad daughter, Rose of Sharon) leave the family. Led by
Ma, the remaining members realize they can only continue, as nothing is
left for them in Oklahoma. Reaching California, they find the state
oversupplied with labor; wages are low, and workers are exploited to the
point of starvation. The big corporate farmers are in collusion and
smaller farmers suffer from collapsing prices. Weedpatch Camp, one of
the clean, utility-supplied camps operated by the Resettlement
Administration, a New Deal agency, offers better conditions but does not
have enough resources to care for all the needy families. Nonetheless,
as a Federal facility, the camp protects the migrants from harassment by
local deputies.

In response to the exploitation, Casy becomes a labor organizer and
tries to recruit for a labor union. The remaining Joads find work as
strikebreakers in a peach orchard, where Casy is involved in a strike
that eventually turns violent. When Tom witnesses Casy\'s fatal beating,
he kills the attacker and flees as a fugitive. The Joads quietly leave
the orchard to work at a cotton farm, where Tom remains at risk of being
arrested for the homicide. Knowing he must leave the area or risk being
caught and his family blacklisted from working, Tom bids his mother
farewell and vows to work for the oppressed. The rest of the family
continues to pick cotton and pool their daily wages so they can buy
food. Rose of Sharon\'s baby is stillborn. Ma Joad remains steadfast and
forces the family through the bereavement. With the winter rains, the
Joads\' dwelling is flooded and the car disabled, and they move to
higher ground. In the final chapter of the book, the family takes
shelter from the flood in an old barn. Inside they find a young boy and
his father, who is dying of starvation. Rose of Sharon takes pity on the
man and offers him her breast milk to save him from starvation.


# Leo Tolstoy

## War and Peace (1869)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_and_Peace>

### Book One {#book_one}

The novel begins in July 1805 in Saint Petersburg, at a soirée given by
Anna Pavlovna Scherer---the maid of honour and confidante to the dowager
Empress Maria Feodorovna. Many of the main characters are introduced as
they enter the salon. Pierre (Pyotr Kirilovich) Bezukhov is the
illegitimate son of a wealthy count, who is dying after a series of
strokes. Pierre is about to become embroiled in a struggle for his
inheritance. Educated abroad at his father\'s expense following his
mother\'s death, Pierre is kindhearted but socially awkward, and finds
it difficult to integrate into Petersburg society. It is known to
everyone at the soirée that Pierre is his father\'s favorite of all the
old count\'s illegitimate progeny. Also attending the soirée is
Pierre\'s friend, Prince Andrei Nikolayevich Bolkonsky, husband of Lise,
a charming society favourite. He is disillusioned with Petersburg
society and with married life, feeling that his wife is empty and
superficial, he comes to hate her and all women, expressing patently
misogynistic views to Pierre when the two are alone. Pierre doesn\'t
quite know what to do with this, and is made uncomfortable witnessing
the marital discord. Andrei tells Pierre he has decided to become
aide-de-camp to Prince Mikhail Ilarionovich Kutuzov in the coming war
against Napoleon in order to escape a life he can\'t stand. The plot
moves to Moscow, Russia\'s former capital, contrasting its provincial,
more Russian ways to the more European society of Saint Petersburg. The
Rostov family are introduced. Count Ilya Andreyevich Rostov and Countess
Natalya Rostova are an affectionate couple but forever worried about
their disordered finances. They have four children. Thirteen-year-old
Natasha (Natalia Ilyinichna) believes herself in love with Boris
Drubetskoy, a young man who is about to join the army as an officer.
Twenty-year-old Nikolai Ilyich pledges his love to Sonya (Sofia
Alexandrovna), his fifteen-year-old cousin, an orphan who has been
brought up by the Rostovs. The eldest child, Vera Ilyinichna, is cold
and somewhat haughty but has a good prospective marriage in a
Russian-German officer, Adolf Karlovich Berg. Petya (Pyotr Ilyich) at
nine is the youngest; like his brother, he is impetuous and eager to
join the army when of age. At Bald Hills, the Bolkonskys\' country
estate, Prince Andrei departs for war and leaves his terrified, pregnant
wife Lise with his eccentric father Prince Nikolai Andreyevich and
devoutly religious sister Maria Nikolayevna Bolkonskaya, who refuses to
marry the son of a wealthy aristocrat on account of her devotion to her
father and suspicion that the young man would be unfaithful to her. The
second part opens with descriptions of the impending Russian-French war
preparations. At the Schöngrabern engagement, Nikolai Rostov, now an
ensign in the hussars, has his first taste of battle. Boris Drubetskoy
introduces him to Prince Andrei, whom Rostov insults in a fit of
impetuousness. He is deeply attracted by Tsar Alexander\'s charisma.
Nikolai gambles and socializes with his officer, Vasily Dmitrich
Denisov, and befriends the ruthless and perhaps psychopathic Fyodor
Ivanovich Dolokhov. Bolkonsky, Rostov and Denisov are involved in the
disastrous Battle of Austerlitz, in which Prince Andrei is badly wounded
as he attempts to rescue a Russian standard. The Battle of Austerlitz is
a major event in the book. As the battle is about to start, Prince
Andrei thinks the approaching \"day \[will\] be his Toulon, or his
Arcola\", references to Napoleon\'s early victories. Later in the
battle, however, Andrei falls into enemy hands and even meets his hero,
Napoleon. But his previous enthusiasm has been shattered; he no longer
thinks much of Napoleon, \"so petty did his hero with his paltry vanity
and delight in victory appear, compared to that lofty, righteous and
kindly sky which he had seen and comprehended\". Tolstoy portrays
Austerlitz as an early test for Russia, one which ended badly because
the soldiers fought for irrelevant things like glory or renown rather
than the higher virtues which would produce, according to Tolstoy, a
victory at Borodino during the 1812 invasion.

### Book Two {#book_two}

Book Two begins with Nikolai Rostov briefly returning on leave to Moscow
accompanied by his friend Denisov, his officer from his Pavlograd
Regiment. He spends an eventful winter at home. Natasha has blossomed
into a beautiful young girl. Denisov falls in love with her and proposes
marriage, but is rejected. Although his mother pleads with Nikolai to
marry a wealthy heiress to rescue the family from its dire financial
straits, Nikolai refuses. Instead, he promises to marry his childhood
sweetheart and orphaned cousin, the dowry-less Sonya. Pierre Bezukhov,
upon finally receiving his massive inheritance, is suddenly transformed
from a bumbling young man into the most eligible bachelor in Russian
society. Despite knowing that it is wrong, he is convinced into marriage
with Prince Kuragin\'s beautiful and immoral daughter Hélène (Elena
Vasilyevna Kuragina). Hélène, who is rumoured to be involved in an
incestuous affair with her brother Anatole, tells Pierre that she will
never have children with him. Hélène is also rumoured to have an affair
with Dolokhov, who mocks Pierre in public. Pierre loses his temper and
challenges Dolokhov to a duel. Unexpectedly (because Dolokhov is a
seasoned dueller), Pierre wounds Dolokhov. Hélène denies her affair, but
Pierre is convinced of her guilt and leaves her. In his moral and
spiritual confusion, Pierre joins the Freemasons. Much of Book Two
concerns his struggles with his passions and his spiritual conflicts. He
abandons his former carefree behavior and enters upon a philosophical
quest particular to Tolstoy: how should one live a moral life in an
ethically imperfect world? The question continually baffles Pierre. He
attempts to liberate his serfs, but ultimately achieves nothing of note.
Pierre is contrasted with Prince Andrei Bolkonsky. Andrei recovers from
his near-fatal wound in a military hospital and returns home, only to
find his wife Lise dying in childbirth. He is stricken by his guilty
conscience for not treating her better. His child, Nikolai, survives.

Burdened with nihilistic disillusionment, Prince Andrei does not return
to the army but remains on his estate, working on a project that would
codify military behavior to solve problems of disorganization
responsible for the loss of life on the Russian side. Pierre visits him
and brings new questions: where is God in this amoral world? Pierre is
interested in panentheism and the possibility of an afterlife. Pierre\'s
wife, Hélène, begs him to take her back, and trying to abide by the
Freemason laws of forgiveness, he agrees. Hélène establishes herself as
an influential hostess in Petersburg society. Prince Andrei feels
impelled to take his newly written military notions to Saint Petersburg,
naively expecting to influence either the Emperor himself or those close
to him. Young Natasha, also in Saint Petersburg, is caught up in the
excitement of her first grand ball, where she meets Prince Andrei and
briefly reinvigorates him with her vivacious charm. Andrei believes he
has found purpose in life again and, after paying the Rostovs several
visits, proposes marriage to Natasha. However, Andrei\'s father dislikes
the Rostovs and opposes the marriage, and he insists the couple wait a
year before marrying. Prince Andrei leaves to recuperate from his wounds
abroad, leaving Natasha initially distraught. Count Rostov takes her and
Sonya to Moscow in order to raise funds for her trousseau. Natasha
visits the Moscow opera, where she meets Hélène and her brother Anatole.
Anatole has since married a Polish woman who he abandoned in Poland. He
is very attracted to Natasha and determined to seduce her, and conspires
with his sister to do so. Anatole succeeds in making Natasha believe he
loves her, eventually establishing plans to elope. Natasha writes to
Princess Maria, Andrei\'s sister, breaking off her engagement. At the
last moment, Sonya discovers her plans to elope and foils them. Natasha
learns from Pierre of Anatole\'s marriage. Devastated, Natasha makes a
suicide attempt and is left seriously ill. Pierre is initially horrified
by Natasha\'s behavior, but realizes he has fallen in love with her. As
the Great Comet of 1811--12 streaks the sky, life appears to begin anew
for Pierre. Prince Andrei coldly accepts Natasha\'s breaking of the
engagement. He tells Pierre that his pride will not allow him to renew
his proposal.

### Book Three {#book_three}

With the help of her family, and the stirrings of religious faith,
Natasha manages to persevere in Moscow through this dark period.
Meanwhile, the whole of Russia is affected by the coming confrontation
between Napoleon\'s army and the Russian army. Pierre convinces himself
through gematria that Napoleon is the Antichrist of the Book of
Revelation. Old Prince Bolkonsky dies of a stroke knowing that French
marauders are coming for his estate. No organized help from any Russian
army seems available to the Bolkonskys, but Nikolai Rostov turns up at
their estate in time to help put down an incipient peasant revolt. He
finds himself attracted to the distraught Princess Maria. Back in
Moscow, the patriotic Petya joins a crowd in audience of Czar Alexander
and manages to snatch a biscuit thrown from the balcony window of the
Cathedral of the Assumption by the Czar. He is nearly crushed by the
throngs in his effort. Under the influence of the same patriotism, his
father finally allows him to enlist. Napoleon himself is the main
character in this section, and the novel presents him in vivid detail,
both personally and as both a thinker and would-be strategist. Also
described are the well-organized force of over four hundred thousand
troops of the French Grande Armée (only one hundred and forty thousand
of them actually French-speaking) that marches through the Russian
countryside in the late summer and reaches the outskirts of the city of
Smolensk. Pierre decides to leave Moscow and go to watch the Battle of
Borodino from a vantage point next to a Russian artillery crew. After
watching for a time, he begins to join in carrying ammunition. In the
midst of the turmoil he experiences first-hand the death and destruction
of war; Eugène\'s artillery continues to pound Russian support columns,
while Marshals Ney and Davout set up a crossfire with artillery
positioned on the Semyonovskaya heights. The battle becomes a hideous
slaughter for both armies and ends in a standoff. The Russians, however,
have won a moral victory by standing up to Napoleon\'s reputedly
invincible army. The Russian army withdraws the next day, allowing
Napoleon to march on to Moscow. Among the casualties are Anatole Kuragin
and Prince Andrei. Anatole loses a leg, and Andrei suffers a grenade
wound in the abdomen. Both are reported dead, but their families are in
such disarray that no one can be notified.

### Book Four {#book_four}

The Rostovs have waited until the last minute to abandon Moscow, even
after it became clear that Kutuzov has retreated past Moscow and
Muscovites are being given contradictory instructions on how to either
flee or fight. Count Fyodor Rostopchin, the commander in chief of
Moscow, is publishing posters, rousing the citizens to put their faith
in religious icons, while at the same time urging them to fight with
pitchforks if necessary. Before fleeing himself, he gives orders to burn
the city. The Rostovs have a difficult time deciding what to take with
them, but in the end, Natasha convinces them to load their carts with
the wounded and dying from the Battle of Borodino. Unknown to Natasha,
Prince Andrei is amongst the wounded. When Napoleon\'s army finally
occupies an abandoned and burning Moscow, Pierre takes off on a quixotic
mission to assassinate Napoleon. He becomes anonymous in all the chaos,
shedding his responsibilities by wearing peasant clothes and shunning
his duties and lifestyle. The only people he sees are Natasha and some
of her family, as they depart Moscow. Natasha recognizes and smiles at
him, and he in turn realizes the full scope of his love for her. Pierre
saves the life of a French officer who enters his home looking for
shelter, and they have a long, amicable conversation. The next day
Pierre goes into the street to resume his assassination plan, and comes
across two French soldiers robbing an Armenian family. When one of the
soldiers tries to rip the necklace off the young Armenian woman\'s neck,
Pierre intervenes by attacking the soldiers, and is taken prisoner by
the French army.

Pierre becomes friends with a fellow prisoner, Platon Karataev, a
Russian peasant with a saintly demeanor. In Karataev, Pierre finally
finds what he has been seeking: an honest person of integrity, who is
utterly without pretense. Pierre discovers meaning in life simply by
interacting with him. After witnessing French soldiers sacking Moscow
and shooting Russian civilians arbitrarily, Pierre is forced to march
with the Grand Army during its disastrous retreat from Moscow in the
harsh Russian winter. After months of trial and tribulation---during
which the fever-plagued Karataev is shot by the French---Pierre is
finally freed by a Russian raiding party led by Dolokhov and Denisov,
after a small skirmish with the French that sees the young Petya Rostov
killed in action. Meanwhile, Andrei has been taken in and cared for by
the Rostovs, fleeing from Moscow to Yaroslavl. He is reunited with
Natasha and his sister Maria before the end of the war. Having lost all
will to live, he forgives Natasha in a last act before dying. As the
novel draws to a close, Pierre\'s wife Hélène dies from an overdose of
an abortifacient (Tolstoy does not state it explicitly but the euphemism
he uses is unambiguous). Pierre is reunited with Natasha, while the
victorious Russians rebuild Moscow. Natasha speaks of Prince Andrei\'s
death and Pierre of Karataev\'s. Both are aware of a growing bond
between them in their bereavement. With the help of Princess Maria,
Pierre finds love at last and marries Natasha.

### Epilogue in two parts {#epilogue_in_two_parts}

#### First part {#first_part}

The first part of the epilogue begins with the wedding of Pierre and
Natasha in 1813. Count Rostov dies soon after, leaving his eldest son
Nikolai to take charge of the debt-ridden estate. Nikolai finds himself
with the task of maintaining the family on the verge of bankruptcy. His
abhorrence at the idea of marrying for wealth almost gets in his way,
but finally he marries the now-rich Maria Bolkonskaya and in so doing
saves his family from financial ruin (though manages to do so without
selling any of his wife\'s property). Nikolai and Maria then move to
Bald Hills with his mother and Sonya, whom he supports for the rest of
their lives. They also raise Prince Andrei\'s orphaned son, Nikolai
Andreyevich (Nikolenka) Bolkonsky. As in all good marriages, there are
misunderstandings, but the couples---Pierre and Natasha, Nikolai and
Maria---remain devoted to their spouses. Pierre and Natasha visit Bald
Hills in 1820. There is a hint in the closing chapters that the
idealistic, boyish Nikolenka and Pierre would both become part of the
Decembrist Uprising. The first epilogue concludes with Nikolenka
promising he would do something with which even his late father \"would
be satisfied\" (presumably as a revolutionary in the Decembrist revolt).

#### Second part {#second_part}

The second part of the epilogue contains Tolstoy\'s critique of all
existing forms of mainstream history. The 19th-century Great Man Theory
claims that historical events are the result of the actions of
\"heroes\" and other great individuals; Tolstoy argues that this is
impossible because of how rarely these actions result in great
historical events. Rather, he argues, great historical events are the
result of many smaller events driven by the thousands of individuals
involved (he compares this to calculus, and the sum of infinitesimals).
He then goes on to argue that these smaller events are the result of an
inverse relationship between necessity and free-will, necessity being
based on reason and therefore explicable through historical analysis,
and free-will being based on \"consciousness\" and therefore inherently
unpredictable.


# Kurt Vonnegut

## Slaughterhouse-Five (1969)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slaughterhouse-Five>

The story is told in a non-linear order, and events become clear through
flashbacks and time travel experiences from the unreliable narrator. The
narrator describes the stories of Billy Pilgrim, an American man from
the fictional town of Ilium, New York who believes he was held in an
alien zoo on the fictional planet of Tralfamadore and has experienced
time travel. As a chaplain\'s assistant in the United States Army during
World War II, Billy is an ill-trained, disoriented, and fatalistic
American soldier who finds he does not like war and refuses to fight
(\"Billy wouldn\'t do anything to save himself\"). He is captured in
1944 by the Germans during the Battle of the Bulge. Billy approaches
death due to a string of events. Before the Germans capture him, he
meets Roland Weary, a patriot, warmonger, and sadistic bully who derides
Billy\'s cowardice. When the two are captured, the Germans confiscate
everything Weary has and force him to wear painful wooden clogs. Weary
eventually succumbs to gangrene caused by wounds from the stiff clogs.
While dying in a rail car full of prisoners, Weary convinces fellow
soldier Paul Lazzaro that Billy is to blame for his death. Lazzaro vows
to avenge Weary\'s death by killing Billy, because revenge is \"the
sweetest thing in life.\" At this moment, Billy becomes \"unstuck in
time\" and has flashbacks from his former life. Billy and the other
prisoners are transported by the Germans to Luxembourg. By 1945, the
prisoners have arrived in the German city of Dresden to work in
\"contract labor\" (forced labor). The Germans hold Billy and his fellow
prisoners in an empty slaughterhouse called Schlachthof-fünf
(\"slaughterhouse five\"). During the extensive bombing of Dresden by
the Allies, German guards hide with the prisoners in the slaughterhouse,
which is partially underground and well-protected from the damage on the
surface. As a result, they are among the few survivors of the firestorm
that rages in the city between February 13 and 15, 1945. After V-E Day
in May 1945, Billy is transferred to the United States and receives his
honorable discharge in July 1945. Soon, Billy is hospitalized with
symptoms similar to post-traumatic stress disorder and placed under
psychiatric care. There, he shares a room with Eliot Rosewater, who
introduces Billy to the novels of the obscure science fiction author
Kilgore Trout. After his release, Billy marries Valencia Merble, whose
father owns the Ilium School of Optometry that Billy later attends.
Billy becomes a successful and wealthy optometrist. In 1947, Billy and
Valencia\'s first child, Robert, is born, and two years later their
daughter Barbara is born. On Barbara\'s wedding night, Billy is captured
by an alien spaceship and taken to a planet many light-years away from
Earth called Tralfamadore. The Tralfamadorians are described as being
able to see in four dimensions, simultaneously observing all points in
the space-time continuum. They universally adopt a fatalistic worldview:
death means nothing to them, and their common response to hearing about
death is \"so it goes\". On Tralfamadore, Billy is put in a transparent
geodesic dome exhibit in a zoo; the dome represents a house on Earth.
The Tralfamadorians later abduct a pornographic film star named Montana
Wildhack, who had disappeared on Earth and was believed to have drowned
herself in the Pacific Ocean. They intend to have her mate with Billy.
She and Billy fall in love and have a child together. Billy is
instantaneously sent back to Earth in a time warp to relive past or
future moments of his life. In 1968, Billy and a co-pilot are the only
survivors of a plane crash in Vermont. While driving to visit Billy in
the hospital, Valencia also crashes and dies of carbon monoxide
poisoning. Billy shares a hospital room with Bertram Rumfoord, a Harvard
history professor. They discuss the bombing of Dresden, which the
professor claims was justified despite the great loss of civilian lives
and the complete destruction of the city. Billy\'s daughter takes him
home to Ilium. He escapes and flees to New York City. In Times Square he
visits a pornographic book store, where he discovers books written by
Kilgore Trout and reads them. Later in the evening, when he discusses
his time travels to Tralfamadore on a radio talk show, he is evicted
from the studio. He returns to his hotel room, falls asleep, and
time-travels back to 1945 in Dresden, where the book ends. Due to the
non-chronological storytelling, other parts of Billy\'s life are told
throughout the book. After being evicted from the radio studio, Barbara
treats Billy as a child and often monitors him. Robert becomes starkly
anti-Communist and a Green Beret. Billy eventually dies in 1976 after
giving a speech in a baseball stadium in which he predicts his own death
and proclaims that \"if you think death is a terrible thing, then you
have not understood a word I\'ve said.\" Billy is soon after shot by an
assassin with a laser gun, commissioned by the elderly Lazzaro.


# Oscar Wilde

## The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Picture_of_Dorian_Gray>

The Picture of Dorian Gray begins on a beautiful summer day in Victorian
England, where Lord Henry Wotton, an opinionated man, is observing the
sensitive artist Basil Hallward painting the portrait of Dorian Gray, a
handsome young man who is Basil\'s ultimate muse. While sitting for the
painting, Dorian listens to Lord Henry espousing his hedonistic world
view and begins to think that beauty is the only aspect of life worth
pursuing, prompting Dorian to wish that his portrait would age instead
of himself. Under Lord Henry\'s hedonistic influence, Dorian fully
explores his sensuality. He discovers the actress Sibyl Vane, who
performs Shakespeare plays in a dingy, working-class theatre. Dorian
approaches and courts her, and soon proposes marriage. The enamoured
Sibyl calls him \"Prince Charming\", and swoons with the happiness of
being loved, but her protective brother, James, warns that if \"Prince
Charming\" harms her, he will murder him. Dorian invites Basil and Lord
Henry to see Sibyl perform in Romeo and Juliet. Sibyl, too enamoured
with Dorian to act, performs poorly, which makes both Basil and Lord
Henry think Dorian has fallen in love with Sibyl because of her beauty
instead of her acting talent. Embarrassed, Dorian rejects Sibyl, telling
her that acting was her beauty; without that, she no longer interests
him. On returning home, Dorian notices that the portrait has changed;
his wish has come true, and the man in the portrait bears a subtle sneer
of cruelty. Conscience-stricken and lonely, Dorian decides to reconcile
with Sibyl, but he is too late, as Lord Henry informs him that Sibyl has
killed herself. Dorian then understands that, where his life is headed,
lust and beauty shall suffice. Dorian locks the portrait up, and over
the following eighteen years, he experiments with every vice, influenced
by a morally poisonous French novel that Lord Henry Wotton gave him. One
night, before leaving for Paris, Basil goes to Dorian\'s house to ask
him about rumors of his self-indulgent sensualism. Dorian does not deny
his debauchery, and takes Basil to see the portrait. The portrait has
become so hideous that Basil is only able to identify it as his by the
signature he affixes to all his portraits. Basil is horrified, and
beseeches Dorian to pray for salvation. In anger, Dorian blames his fate
on Basil and stabs him to death. Dorian then calmly blackmails an old
friend, the scientist Alan Campbell, into using his knowledge of
chemistry to destroy the body of Basil Hallward. Alan later kills
himself.

To escape the guilt of his crime, Dorian goes to an opium den, where
James Vane is unknowingly present. James had been seeking vengeance upon
Dorian ever since Sibyl killed herself, but had no leads to pursue: the
only thing he knew about Dorian was the name Sibyl called him, \"Prince
Charming\". In the opium den however he hears someone refer to Dorian as
\"Prince Charming\", and he accosts Dorian. Dorian deceives James into
believing that he is too young to have known Sibyl, who killed herself
18 years earlier, as his face is still that of a young man. James
relents and releases Dorian, but is then approached by a woman from the
opium den who reproaches James for not killing Dorian. She confirms that
the man was Dorian Gray and explains that he has not aged in 18 years.
James runs after Dorian, but he has gone. James then begins to stalk
Dorian, causing Dorian to fear for his life. However, during a shooting
party, a hunter accidentally kills James Vane, who was lurking in a
thicket. On returning to London, Dorian tells Lord Henry that he will
live righteously from now on. His new probity begins with deliberately
not breaking the heart of the naïve Hetty Merton, his current romantic
interest. Dorian wonders if his newfound goodness has reverted the
corruption in the picture, but when he looks at it, he sees only an even
uglier image of himself. From that, Dorian understands that his true
motives for the self-sacrifice of moral reformation were the vanity and
curiosity of his quest for new experiences, along with the desire to
restore beauty to the picture. Deciding that only full confession will
absolve him of wrongdoing, Dorian decides to destroy the last vestige of
his conscience and the only piece of evidence remaining of his
crimes---the picture. In a rage, he takes the knife with which he
murdered Basil Hallward and stabs the picture. The servants of the house
awaken on hearing a cry from the locked room; on the street, a passerby
who also heard the cry, calls the police. On entering the locked room,
the servants find an unknown old man stabbed in the heart, his figure
withered and decrepit. The servants identify the disfigured corpse by
the rings on its fingers, which belonged to Dorian Gray. Beside him, the
portrait is now restored to its former appearance of beauty.


