---
title: Book Summaries
author: Andrew MacFie
rights:  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
language: en-US
...

# Preface

Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0

Generated by <https://github.com/amacfie/book_summary_book>


# Thomas Hardy

## War and Peace (1869)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_and_Peace>

### Book One {#book_one}

The novel begins in July 1805 in Saint Petersburg, at a soirée given by
Anna Pavlovna Scherer---the maid of honour and confidante to the dowager
Empress Maria Feodorovna. Many of the main characters are introduced as
they enter the salon. Pierre (Pyotr Kirilovich) Bezukhov is the
illegitimate son of a wealthy count, who is dying after a series of
strokes. Pierre is about to become embroiled in a struggle for his
inheritance. Educated abroad at his father\'s expense following his
mother\'s death, Pierre is kindhearted but socially awkward, and finds
it difficult to integrate into Petersburg society. It is known to
everyone at the soirée that Pierre is his father\'s favorite of all the
old count\'s illegitimate progeny. Also attending the soirée is
Pierre\'s friend, Prince Andrei Nikolayevich Bolkonsky, husband of Lise,
a charming society favourite. He is disillusioned with Petersburg
society and with married life, feeling that his wife is empty and
superficial, he comes to hate her and all women, expressing patently
misogynistic views to Pierre when the two are alone. Pierre doesn\'t
quite know what to do with this, and is made uncomfortable witnessing
the marital discord. Andrei tells Pierre he has decided to become
aide-de-camp to Prince Mikhail Ilarionovich Kutuzov in the coming war
against Napoleon in order to escape a life he can\'t stand. The plot
moves to Moscow, Russia\'s former capital, contrasting its provincial,
more Russian ways to the more European society of Saint Petersburg. The
Rostov family are introduced. Count Ilya Andreyevich Rostov and Countess
Natalya Rostova are an affectionate couple but forever worried about
their disordered finances. They have four children. Thirteen-year-old
Natasha (Natalia Ilyinichna) believes herself in love with Boris
Drubetskoy, a young man who is about to join the army as an officer.
Twenty-year-old Nikolai Ilyich pledges his love to Sonya (Sofia
Alexandrovna), his fifteen-year-old cousin, an orphan who has been
brought up by the Rostovs. The eldest child, Vera Ilyinichna, is cold
and somewhat haughty but has a good prospective marriage in a
Russian-German officer, Adolf Karlovich Berg. Petya (Pyotr Ilyich) at
nine is the youngest; like his brother, he is impetuous and eager to
join the army when of age. At Bald Hills, the Bolkonskys\' country
estate, Prince Andrei departs for war and leaves his terrified, pregnant
wife Lise with his eccentric father Prince Nikolai Andreyevich and
devoutly religious sister Maria Nikolayevna Bolkonskaya, who refuses to
marry the son of a wealthy aristocrat on account of her devotion to her
father and suspicion that the young man would be unfaithful to her. The
second part opens with descriptions of the impending Russian-French war
preparations. At the Schöngrabern engagement, Nikolai Rostov, now an
ensign in the hussars, has his first taste of battle. Boris Drubetskoy
introduces him to Prince Andrei, whom Rostov insults in a fit of
impetuousness. He is deeply attracted by Tsar Alexander\'s charisma.
Nikolai gambles and socializes with his officer, Vasily Dmitrich
Denisov, and befriends the ruthless and perhaps psychopathic Fyodor
Ivanovich Dolokhov. Bolkonsky, Rostov and Denisov are involved in the
disastrous Battle of Austerlitz, in which Prince Andrei is badly wounded
as he attempts to rescue a Russian standard. The Battle of Austerlitz is
a major event in the book. As the battle is about to start, Prince
Andrei thinks the approaching \"day \[will\] be his Toulon, or his
Arcola\", references to Napoleon\'s early victories. Later in the
battle, however, Andrei falls into enemy hands and even meets his hero,
Napoleon. But his previous enthusiasm has been shattered; he no longer
thinks much of Napoleon, \"so petty did his hero with his paltry vanity
and delight in victory appear, compared to that lofty, righteous and
kindly sky which he had seen and comprehended\". Tolstoy portrays
Austerlitz as an early test for Russia, one which ended badly because
the soldiers fought for irrelevant things like glory or renown rather
than the higher virtues which would produce, according to Tolstoy, a
victory at Borodino during the 1812 invasion.

### Book Two {#book_two}

Book Two begins with Nikolai Rostov briefly returning on leave to Moscow
accompanied by his friend Denisov, his officer from his Pavlograd
Regiment. He spends an eventful winter at home. Natasha has blossomed
into a beautiful young girl. Denisov falls in love with her and proposes
marriage, but is rejected. Although his mother pleads with Nikolai to
marry a wealthy heiress to rescue the family from its dire financial
straits, Nikolai refuses. Instead, he promises to marry his childhood
sweetheart and orphaned cousin, the dowry-less Sonya. Pierre Bezukhov,
upon finally receiving his massive inheritance, is suddenly transformed
from a bumbling young man into the most eligible bachelor in Russian
society. Despite knowing that it is wrong, he is convinced into marriage
with Prince Kuragin\'s beautiful and immoral daughter Hélène (Elena
Vasilyevna Kuragina). Hélène, who is rumoured to be involved in an
incestuous affair with her brother Anatole, tells Pierre that she will
never have children with him. Hélène is also rumoured to have an affair
with Dolokhov, who mocks Pierre in public. Pierre loses his temper and
challenges Dolokhov to a duel. Unexpectedly (because Dolokhov is a
seasoned dueller), Pierre wounds Dolokhov. Hélène denies her affair, but
Pierre is convinced of her guilt and leaves her. In his moral and
spiritual confusion, Pierre joins the Freemasons. Much of Book Two
concerns his struggles with his passions and his spiritual conflicts. He
abandons his former carefree behavior and enters upon a philosophical
quest particular to Tolstoy: how should one live a moral life in an
ethically imperfect world? The question continually baffles Pierre. He
attempts to liberate his serfs, but ultimately achieves nothing of note.
Pierre is contrasted with Prince Andrei Bolkonsky. Andrei recovers from
his near-fatal wound in a military hospital and returns home, only to
find his wife Lise dying in childbirth. He is stricken by his guilty
conscience for not treating her better. His child, Nikolai, survives.

Burdened with nihilistic disillusionment, Prince Andrei does not return
to the army but remains on his estate, working on a project that would
codify military behavior to solve problems of disorganization
responsible for the loss of life on the Russian side. Pierre visits him
and brings new questions: where is God in this amoral world? Pierre is
interested in panentheism and the possibility of an afterlife. Pierre\'s
wife, Hélène, begs him to take her back, and trying to abide by the
Freemason laws of forgiveness, he agrees. Hélène establishes herself as
an influential hostess in Petersburg society. Prince Andrei feels
impelled to take his newly written military notions to Saint Petersburg,
naively expecting to influence either the Emperor himself or those close
to him. Young Natasha, also in Saint Petersburg, is caught up in the
excitement of her first grand ball, where she meets Prince Andrei and
briefly reinvigorates him with her vivacious charm. Andrei believes he
has found purpose in life again and, after paying the Rostovs several
visits, proposes marriage to Natasha. However, Andrei\'s father dislikes
the Rostovs and opposes the marriage, and he insists the couple wait a
year before marrying. Prince Andrei leaves to recuperate from his wounds
abroad, leaving Natasha initially distraught. Count Rostov takes her and
Sonya to Moscow in order to raise funds for her trousseau. Natasha
visits the Moscow opera, where she meets Hélène and her brother Anatole.
Anatole has since married a Polish woman who he abandoned in Poland. He
is very attracted to Natasha and determined to seduce her, and conspires
with his sister to do so. Anatole succeeds in making Natasha believe he
loves her, eventually establishing plans to elope. Natasha writes to
Princess Maria, Andrei\'s sister, breaking off her engagement. At the
last moment, Sonya discovers her plans to elope and foils them. Natasha
learns from Pierre of Anatole\'s marriage. Devastated, Natasha makes a
suicide attempt and is left seriously ill. Pierre is initially horrified
by Natasha\'s behavior, but realizes he has fallen in love with her. As
the Great Comet of 1811--12 streaks the sky, life appears to begin anew
for Pierre. Prince Andrei coldly accepts Natasha\'s breaking of the
engagement. He tells Pierre that his pride will not allow him to renew
his proposal.

### Book Three {#book_three}

With the help of her family, and the stirrings of religious faith,
Natasha manages to persevere in Moscow through this dark period.
Meanwhile, the whole of Russia is affected by the coming confrontation
between Napoleon\'s army and the Russian army. Pierre convinces himself
through gematria that Napoleon is the Antichrist of the Book of
Revelation. Old Prince Bolkonsky dies of a stroke knowing that French
marauders are coming for his estate. No organized help from any Russian
army seems available to the Bolkonskys, but Nikolai Rostov turns up at
their estate in time to help put down an incipient peasant revolt. He
finds himself attracted to the distraught Princess Maria. Back in
Moscow, the patriotic Petya joins a crowd in audience of Czar Alexander
and manages to snatch a biscuit thrown from the balcony window of the
Cathedral of the Assumption by the Czar. He is nearly crushed by the
throngs in his effort. Under the influence of the same patriotism, his
father finally allows him to enlist. Napoleon himself is the main
character in this section, and the novel presents him in vivid detail,
both personally and as both a thinker and would-be strategist. Also
described are the well-organized force of over four hundred thousand
troops of the French Grande Armée (only one hundred and forty thousand
of them actually French-speaking) that marches through the Russian
countryside in the late summer and reaches the outskirts of the city of
Smolensk. Pierre decides to leave Moscow and go to watch the Battle of
Borodino from a vantage point next to a Russian artillery crew. After
watching for a time, he begins to join in carrying ammunition. In the
midst of the turmoil he experiences first-hand the death and destruction
of war; Eugène\'s artillery continues to pound Russian support columns,
while Marshals Ney and Davout set up a crossfire with artillery
positioned on the Semyonovskaya heights. The battle becomes a hideous
slaughter for both armies and ends in a standoff. The Russians, however,
have won a moral victory by standing up to Napoleon\'s reputedly
invincible army. The Russian army withdraws the next day, allowing
Napoleon to march on to Moscow. Among the casualties are Anatole Kuragin
and Prince Andrei. Anatole loses a leg, and Andrei suffers a grenade
wound in the abdomen. Both are reported dead, but their families are in
such disarray that no one can be notified.

### Book Four {#book_four}

The Rostovs have waited until the last minute to abandon Moscow, even
after it became clear that Kutuzov has retreated past Moscow and
Muscovites are being given contradictory instructions on how to either
flee or fight. Count Fyodor Rostopchin, the commander in chief of
Moscow, is publishing posters, rousing the citizens to put their faith
in religious icons, while at the same time urging them to fight with
pitchforks if necessary. Before fleeing himself, he gives orders to burn
the city. The Rostovs have a difficult time deciding what to take with
them, but in the end, Natasha convinces them to load their carts with
the wounded and dying from the Battle of Borodino. Unknown to Natasha,
Prince Andrei is amongst the wounded. When Napoleon\'s army finally
occupies an abandoned and burning Moscow, Pierre takes off on a quixotic
mission to assassinate Napoleon. He becomes anonymous in all the chaos,
shedding his responsibilities by wearing peasant clothes and shunning
his duties and lifestyle. The only people he sees are Natasha and some
of her family, as they depart Moscow. Natasha recognizes and smiles at
him, and he in turn realizes the full scope of his love for her. Pierre
saves the life of a French officer who enters his home looking for
shelter, and they have a long, amicable conversation. The next day
Pierre goes into the street to resume his assassination plan, and comes
across two French soldiers robbing an Armenian family. When one of the
soldiers tries to rip the necklace off the young Armenian woman\'s neck,
Pierre intervenes by attacking the soldiers, and is taken prisoner by
the French army.

Pierre becomes friends with a fellow prisoner, Platon Karataev, a
Russian peasant with a saintly demeanor. In Karataev, Pierre finally
finds what he has been seeking: an honest person of integrity, who is
utterly without pretense. Pierre discovers meaning in life simply by
interacting with him. After witnessing French soldiers sacking Moscow
and shooting Russian civilians arbitrarily, Pierre is forced to march
with the Grand Army during its disastrous retreat from Moscow in the
harsh Russian winter. After months of trial and tribulation---during
which the fever-plagued Karataev is shot by the French---Pierre is
finally freed by a Russian raiding party led by Dolokhov and Denisov,
after a small skirmish with the French that sees the young Petya Rostov
killed in action. Meanwhile, Andrei has been taken in and cared for by
the Rostovs, fleeing from Moscow to Yaroslavl. He is reunited with
Natasha and his sister Maria before the end of the war. Having lost all
will to live, he forgives Natasha in a last act before dying. As the
novel draws to a close, Pierre\'s wife Hélène dies from an overdose of
an abortifacient (Tolstoy does not state it explicitly but the euphemism
he uses is unambiguous). Pierre is reunited with Natasha, while the
victorious Russians rebuild Moscow. Natasha speaks of Prince Andrei\'s
death and Pierre of Karataev\'s. Both are aware of a growing bond
between them in their bereavement. With the help of Princess Maria,
Pierre finds love at last and marries Natasha.

### Epilogue in two parts {#epilogue_in_two_parts}

#### First part {#first_part}

The first part of the epilogue begins with the wedding of Pierre and
Natasha in 1813. Count Rostov dies soon after, leaving his eldest son
Nikolai to take charge of the debt-ridden estate. Nikolai finds himself
with the task of maintaining the family on the verge of bankruptcy. His
abhorrence at the idea of marrying for wealth almost gets in his way,
but finally he marries the now-rich Maria Bolkonskaya and in so doing
saves his family from financial ruin (though manages to do so without
selling any of his wife\'s property). Nikolai and Maria then move to
Bald Hills with his mother and Sonya, whom he supports for the rest of
their lives. They also raise Prince Andrei\'s orphaned son, Nikolai
Andreyevich (Nikolenka) Bolkonsky. As in all good marriages, there are
misunderstandings, but the couples---Pierre and Natasha, Nikolai and
Maria---remain devoted to their spouses. Pierre and Natasha visit Bald
Hills in 1820. There is a hint in the closing chapters that the
idealistic, boyish Nikolenka and Pierre would both become part of the
Decembrist Uprising. The first epilogue concludes with Nikolenka
promising he would do something with which even his late father \"would
be satisfied\" (presumably as a revolutionary in the Decembrist revolt).

#### Second part {#second_part}

The second part of the epilogue contains Tolstoy\'s critique of all
existing forms of mainstream history. The 19th-century Great Man Theory
claims that historical events are the result of the actions of
\"heroes\" and other great individuals; Tolstoy argues that this is
impossible because of how rarely these actions result in great
historical events. Rather, he argues, great historical events are the
result of many smaller events driven by the thousands of individuals
involved (he compares this to calculus, and the sum of infinitesimals).
He then goes on to argue that these smaller events are the result of an
inverse relationship between necessity and free-will, necessity being
based on reason and therefore explicable through historical analysis,
and free-will being based on \"consciousness\" and therefore inherently
unpredictable.


# Leo Tolstoy

## Far from the Madding Crowd (1874)

Taken from <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Far_from_the_Madding_Crowd>

### Meeting, parting and reuniting {#meeting_parting_and_reuniting}

Gabriel Oak is a young shepherd. With the savings of a frugal life, and
a loan, he has leased and stocked a farm. He falls in love with a
newcomer eight years his junior, Bathsheba Everdene, a proud beauty who
arrives to live with her aunt. Over time, Bathsheba and Gabriel grow to
like each other well enough, and Bathsheba even saves his life once.
However, when he makes her an unadorned offer of marriage, she refuses;
she values her independence too much and him too little. After a few
days, she moves to Weatherbury, a village some miles off. When next they
meet, their circumstances have changed drastically. An inexperienced new
sheepdog drives Gabriel\'s flock over a cliff, ruining him. After
selling off everything of value, he manages to settle all his debts but
emerges penniless. He seeks employment at a hiring fair in the town of
Casterbridge. When he finds none, he heads to another such fair in
Shottsford, a town about ten miles from Weatherbury. On the way, he
happens upon a dangerous fire on a farm and leads the bystanders in
putting it out. When the veiled owner comes to thank him, he asks if she
needs a shepherd. She uncovers her face and reveals herself to be none
other than Bathsheba. She has recently inherited her uncle\'s estate and
is now wealthy. Though somewhat uncomfortable, she employs him.

### Bathsheba\'s valentine to Boldwood {#bathshebas_valentine_to_boldwood}

Meanwhile, Bathsheba gains a new admirer. William Boldwood is a
prosperous farmer of about 40, whose ardour Bathsheba unwittingly
awakens when she playfully sends him a valentine sealed with red wax on
which she has embossed the words \"Marry me\". Boldwood, not realising
the valentine was a jest, becomes obsessed with her and soon proposes
marriage. Although she does not love him, she toys with the idea of
accepting his offer; he is the most eligible bachelor in the district.
However, she avoids giving him a definite answer. When Gabriel rebukes
her for her thoughtlessness regarding Boldwood, she dismisses him. When
Bathsheba\'s sheep begin dying from bloat, she discovers to her chagrin
that Gabriel is the only man who knows how to cure them. Her pride
delays the inevitable, but finally she is forced to beg him for help.
Afterward, she offers him back his job, and their friendship is
restored.

### Sergeant Troy {#sergeant_troy}

At this point, the dashing Sergeant Francis \"Frank\" Troy returns to
his native Weatherbury and by chance encounters Bathsheba one night. Her
initial dislike turns to infatuation after he excites her with a private
display of swordsmanship. Gabriel observes Bathsheba\'s interest in the
young soldier and tries to discourage it, telling her she would be
better off marrying Boldwood. Boldwood becomes aggressive towards Troy,
and Bathsheba goes to Bath to prevent Troy returning to Weatherbury, as
she fears what might happen if Troy encountered Boldwood. On their
return, Boldwood offers his rival a large bribe to give up Bathsheba.
Troy pretends to consider the offer, then scornfully announces they are
already married. Boldwood withdraws, humiliated, and vows revenge.
Bathsheba soon discovers that her new husband is an improvident gambler
with little interest in farming. Worse, she begins to suspect he does
not love her. In fact, Troy\'s heart belongs to her former servant,
Fanny Robin. Before meeting Bathsheba, Troy had promised to marry Fanny;
on the wedding day, however, the luckless girl went to the wrong church.
She explained her mistake, but Troy, humiliated at being left at the
altar, angrily called off the wedding. When they parted, unbeknownst to
Troy, Fanny was pregnant with his child.

### Fanny Robin {#fanny_robin}

Some months later, Troy and Bathsheba encounter Fanny on the road,
destitute, as she painfully makes her way toward the Casterbridge
workhouse. Troy sends his wife onward, then gives Fanny all the money in
his pocket, telling her he will give her more in a few days. Fanny uses
up the last of her strength to reach her destination. A few hours later,
she dies in childbirth, along with the baby. Mother and child are then
placed in a coffin and sent home to Weatherbury for interment. Gabriel,
who knows of Troy\'s relationship with Fanny, tries to conceal the
child\'s existence -- but Bathsheba agrees that the coffin can be left
in her house overnight, from her sense of duty towards a former servant.
Her servant and confidante, Liddy, repeats the rumour that Fanny had a
child; when all the servants are in bed, Bathsheba unscrews the lid and
sees the two bodies inside. Troy then comes home from Casterbridge,
where he had gone to keep his appointment with Fanny. Seeing the reason
for her failure to meet him, he gently kisses the corpse and tells the
anguished Bathsheba, \"This woman is more to me, dead as she is, than
ever you were, or are, or can be\". The next day he spends all his money
on a marble tombstone with the inscription: \"Erected by Francis Troy in
beloved memory of Fanny Robin \...\" Then, loathing himself and unable
to bear Bathsheba\'s company, he leaves. After a long walk, he bathes in
the sea, leaving his clothes on the beach. A strong current carries him
away, but he is rescued by a rowing boat.

### Troy returns {#troy_returns}

A year later, with Troy presumed drowned, Boldwood renews his suit.
Burdened with guilt over the pain she has caused him, Bathsheba
reluctantly consents to marry him in six years, long enough to have Troy
declared dead. Troy tires of his hand-to-mouth existence as a travelling
actor and considers reclaiming his position and wife. He returns to
Weatherbury on Christmas Eve and goes to Boldwood\'s house, where a
party is under way. He orders Bathsheba to come with him; when she
shrinks back in shock and dismay, he seizes her arm, and she screams. At
this, Boldwood shoots Troy dead and tries unsuccessfully to turn the
double-barrelled gun on himself. Although Boldwood is convicted of
murder and sentenced to be hanged, his friends petition the Home
Secretary for mercy, claiming insanity. This is granted, and Boldwood\'s
sentence is commuted to \"confinement during Her Majesty\'s pleasure\".
Bathsheba buries her husband in the same grave as Fanny Robin and their
child.

### Gabriel triumphant {#gabriel_triumphant}

Throughout her tribulations, Bathsheba comes to rely increasingly on her
oldest and, as she admits to herself, only real friend, Gabriel. When he
gives notice that he is leaving her employ, she realises how important
he has become to her well-being. That night, she goes alone to visit him
in his cottage, to find out why he is deserting her. Pressed, he
reluctantly reveals that it is because people have been gossiping that
he wants to marry her. She exclaims that it is \"\... too absurd -- too
soon -- to think of, by far!\" He bitterly agrees that it is absurd, but
when she corrects him, saying that it is only \"too soon\", he is
emboldened to ask once again for her hand in marriage. She accepts, and
the two are quietly married.


